1. Deontology’s Foil: Consequentialism


Because deontological theories are best understood in contrast to
consequentialist ones, a brief look at consequentialism and a survey
of the problems with it that motivate its deontological opponents,
provides a helpful prelude to taking up deontological theories
themselves. Consequentialists hold that choices—acts and/or
intentions—are not the primary focus of value—that
consists of states of affairs. Choices are to be derivatively
assessed, in terms of the states of affairs they bring about.
Consequentialists thus must specify the states of affairs that are
intrinsically valuable—often called, collectively, “the
Good.” They then are in a position to assert that whatever
choices increase the Good, that is, bring about more of it, are the
choices that it is morally right to make and to execute. (The Good in
that sense is said to be prior to “the Right.”)


Consequentialists can and do differ widely in terms of specifying the
Good. Some consequentialists are monists about the Good. Utilitarians,
for example, identify the Good with pleasure, happiness, desire
satisfaction, or “welfare” in some other sense. Other
consequentialists are pluralists regarding the Good. Some of such
pluralists believe that how the Good is distributed among persons (or
all sentient beings) is itself partly constitutive of the Good,
whereas conventional utilitarians merely add or average each
person’s share of the Good to achieve the Good’s
maximization.


Moreover, there are some consequentialists who hold that the doing or
refraining from doing, of certain kinds of acts are themselves
intrinsically valuable states of affairs constitutive of the Good. An
example of this is the positing of rights not being violated, or
duties being kept, as part of the Good to be maximized—the
so-called “utilitarianism of rights” (Nozick 1974).


None of these pluralist positions about the Good erase the difference
between consequentialism and deontology. For the essence of
consequentialism is still present in such positions as much as it is
in monistic positions about the Good: an action would be right only
insofar as it maximizes these Good-making states of affairs being
caused to exist. Moreover, consequentialists generally agree that the
Good is “agent-neutral” (Parfit 1984; Nagel 1986). That
is, valuable states of affairs are states of affairs that all agents
have reason to achieve without regard to whether such states of
affairs are achieved through the exercise of one’s own agency or
not.


Consequentialism is frequently criticized on a number of grounds. Two
of these are particularly apt for revealing the temptations motivating
the alternative approach to deontic ethics that is deontology. The two
criticisms pertinent here are that consequentialism is, on the one
hand, overly demanding, and, on the other hand, that it is not
demanding enough. The criticism regarding extreme demandingness runs
like this: for consequentialists, there is no realm of moral
permissions, no realm of going beyond one’s moral duty
(supererogation), no realm of moral indifference. All acts are
seemingly either required or forbidden. And there also seems to be no
space for the consequentialist in which to show partiality to
one’s own projects or to one’s family, friends, and
countrymen, leading some critics of consequentialism to deem it a
profoundly alienating and perhaps self-effacing moral theory (Williams
1973).


On the other hand, consequentialism is also criticized for what it
seemingly permits. It seemingly demands (and thus, of course, permits)
that in certain circumstances innocents be killed, beaten, lied to, or
deprived of material goods to produce greater benefits for others.
Consequences—and only consequences—can conceivably justify
any kind of act, for it does not matter how harmful it is to
some so long as it is more beneficial to others.


A well-worn example of this over-permissiveness of consequentialism is
that of a case standardly called, Transplant. A surgeon has five
patients dying of organ failure and one healthy patient whose organs
can save the five. In the right circumstances, surgeon will be
permitted (and indeed required) by consequentialism to kill the
healthy patient to obtain his organs, assuming there are no relevant
consequences other than the saving of the five and the death of the
one. Likewise, consequentialism will permit (in a case that we shall
call, Fat Man) that a fat man be pushed in front of a runaway trolley
if his being crushed by the trolley will halt its advance towards five
workers trapped on the track. We shall return to these examples later
on.


Consequentialists are of course not bereft of replies to these two
criticisms. Some retreat from maximizing the Good to
“satisficing”—that is, making the achievement of
only a certain level of the Good mandatory (Slote 1984). This move
opens up some space for personal projects and relationships, as well
as a realm of the morally permissible. It is not clear, however, that
satisficing is adequately motivated, given that it counterintuitively
permits gratuitous preventions of good reasons simply to avoid the
problems of maximizing (Bradley 2006). Nor is it clear that the level
of mandatory satisficing can be nonarbitrarily specified, or that
satisficing will not require deontological constraints to protect
satisficers from maximizers.


Another move is to introduce a positive/negative duty distinction
within consequentialism. On this view, our (negative) duty is not to
make the world worse by actions having bad consequences; lacking is a
corresponding (positive) duty to make the world better by actions
having good consequences (Bentham 1789 (1948); Quinton 2007). We thus
have a consequentialist duty not to kill the one in Transplant or in
Fat Man; and there is no counterbalancing duty to save five that
overrides this. Yet as with the satisficing move, it is unclear how a
consistent consequentialist can motivate this restriction on all-out
optimization of the Good.


Yet another idea popular with consequentialists is to move from
consequentialism as a theory that directly assesses acts, to
consequentialism as a theory that directly assesses
rules—or character-trait inculcation—and assesses
acts only indirectly by reference to such rules (or character-traits)
(Alexander 1985). Its proponents contend that indirect
consequentialism can avoid the criticisms of direct (act)
consequentialism because it will not legitimate egregious violations
of ordinary moral standards—e.g., the killing of the innocent to
bring about some better state of affairs—nor will it be overly
demanding and thus alienating each of us from our own projects.


The relevance here of these defensive maneuvers by consequentialists
is their common attempt to mimic the intuitively plausible aspects of
a non-consequentialist, deontological approach to ethics. For as we
shall now explore, the strengths of deontological approaches lie: (1)
in their categorical prohibition of actions like the killing of
innocents, even when good consequences are in the offing; and (2) in
their permission to each of us to pursue our own projects free of any
constant demand that we shape those projects so as to make everyone
else well off.

2. Deontological Theories


In contrast to consequentialist theories, deontological theories judge
the morality of choices by criteria different from the states of
affairs those choices bring about. The most familiar forms of
deontology, and also the forms presenting the greatest contrast to
consequentialism, hold that some choices cannot be justified by their
effects—that no matter how morally good their consequences, some
choices are morally forbidden. On such familiar deontological accounts
of morality, agents cannot make certain wrongful choices even if by
doing so the number of those exact kinds of wrongful choices will be
minimized (because other agents will be prevented from engaging in
similar wrongful choices). For such deontologists, what makes a choice
right is its conformity with a moral norm. Such norms are to be simply
obeyed by each moral agent; such norm-keepings are not to be maximized
by each agent. In this sense, for such deontologists, the Right is
said to have priority over the Good. If an act is not in accord with
the Right, it may not be undertaken, no matter the Good that it might
produce (including even a Good consisting of acts in accordance with
the Right).


Analogously, deontologists typically supplement non-consequentialist
obligations with non-consequentialist permissions (Scheffler 1982).
That is, certain actions can be right even though not maximizing of
good consequences, for the rightness of such actions consists in their
instantiating certain norms (here, of permission and not of
obligation). Such actions are permitted, not just in the weak sense
that there is no obligation not to do them, but also in the strong
sense that one is permitted to do them even though they are productive
of less good consequences than their alternatives (Moore 2008). Such
strongly permitted actions include actions one is obligated to do, but
(importantly) also included are actions one is not obligated to do. It
is this last feature of such actions that warrants their separate
mention for deontologists.



2.1 Agent-Centered Deontological Theories


The most traditional mode of taxonomizing deontological theories is to
divide them between agent-centered versus victim-centered (or
“patient-centered”) theories (Scheffler 1988; Kamm 2007).
Consider first agent-centered deontological theories. According to
agent-centered theories, we each have both permissions and obligations
that give us agent-relative reasons for action. An agent-relative
reason is an objective reason, just as are agent neutral reasons;
neither is to be confused with either the relativistic reasons of a
relativist meta-ethics, nor with the subjective reasons that form the
nerve of psychological explanations of human action (Nagel 1986). An
agent-relative reason is so-called because it is a reason relative to
the agent whose reason it is; it need not (although it may) constitute
a reason for anyone else. Thus, an agent-relative obligation
is an obligation for a particular agent to take or refrain from taking
some action; and because it is agent-relative, the obligation does not
necessarily give anyone else a reason to support that action. Each
parent, for example, is commonly thought to have such special
obligations to his/her child, obligations not shared by anyone else.
Likewise, an agent-relative permission is a permission for
some agent to do some act even though others may not be permitted to
aid that agent in the doing of his permitted action. Each parent, to
revert to the same example, is commonly thought to be permitted (at
the least) to save his own child even at the cost of not saving two
other children to whom he has no special relation. Agent-centered
theories and the agent-relative reasons on which they are based not
only enjoin each of us to do or not to do certain things; they also
instruct me to treat my friends, my family,
my promisees in certain ways because they are mine,
even if by neglecting them I could do more for others’ friends,
families, and promisees.


At the heart of agent-centered theories (with their agent-relative
reasons) is the idea of agency. The moral plausibility of
agent-centered theories is rooted here. The idea is that morality is
intensely personal, in the sense that we are each enjoined to keep our
own moral house in order. Our categorical obligations are not to focus
on how our actions cause or enable other agents to do evil; the focus
of our categorical obligations is to keep our own agency free of moral
taint.


Each agent’s distinctive moral concern with his/her own agency
puts some pressure on agent-centered theories to clarify how and when
our agency is or is not involved in various situations. Agent-centered
theories famously divide between those that emphasize the role of
intention or other mental states in constituting the morally important
kind of agency, and those that emphasize the actions of agents as
playing such a role (Wedgewood 2011). There are also agent-centered
theories that emphasize both intentions and actions equally in
constituting the morally relevant agency of persons.


On the first of these three agent-relative views, it is most commonly
asserted that it is our intended ends and intended means that most
crucially define our agency. Such intentions mark out what it is we
set out to achieve through our actions. If we intend something bad as
an end, or even as a means to some more beneficent end, we are said to
have “set ourselves at evil,” something we are
categorically forbidden to do (Aquinas Summa Theologica;
Nagel 1979).


Three items usefully contrasted with such intentions are
belief, risk, and cause. If we predict that
an act of ours will result in evil, such prediction is a cognitive
state (of belief); it is not a conative state of intention to bring
about such a result, either as an end in itself or as a means to some
other end. In this case, our agency is involved only to the extent
that we have shown ourselves as being willing to tolerate evil results
flowing from our acts; but we have not set out to achieve such evil by
our acts. Likewise, a risking and/or causing of some evil result is
distinct from any intention to achieve it. We can intend such a
result, and we can even execute such an intention so that it becomes a
trying, without in fact either causing or even risking it. (It is,
however, true that we must believe we are risking the result
to some extent, however minimal, for the result to be what we intend
to bring about by our act.) Also, we can cause or risk such results
without intending them. For example, we can intend to kill and even
try to kill someone without killing him; and we can kill him without
intending or trying to kill him, as when we kill accidentally.
Intending thus does not collapse into risking, causing, or predicting;
and on the version of agent-centered deontology here considered, it is
intending (or perhaps trying) alone that marks the involvement of our
agency in a way so as to bring agent-centered obligations and
permissions into play.


Deontologists of this stripe are committed to something like the
doctrine of double effect, a long-established doctrine of Catholic
theology (Woodward 2001). The Doctrine in its most familiar form
asserts that we are categorically forbidden to intend evils such as
killing the innocent or torturing others, even though doing such acts
would minimize the doing of like acts by others (or even ourselves) in
the future. By contrast, if we only risk, cause, or predict that our
acts will have consequences making them acts of killing or of torture,
then we might be able to justify the doing of such acts by the
killing/torture-minimizing consequences of such actions. Whether such
distinctions are plausible is standardly taken to measure the
plausibility of an intention-focused version of the agent-centered
version of deontology.


There are other versions of mental-state focused agent relativity that
do not focus on intentions (Hurd 1994). Some of these versions focus
on predictive belief as much as on intention (at least when the belief
is of a high degree of certainty). Other versions focus on intended
ends (“motives”) alone. Still others focus on the
deliberative processes that precede the formation of intentions, so
that even to contemplate the doing of an evil act impermissibly
invokes our agency (Anscombe 1958; Geach 1969; Nagel 1979). But
intention-focused versions are the most familiar versions of so-called
“inner wickedness” versions of agent-centered
deontology.


The second kind of agent-centered deontology is one focused on
actions, not mental states. Such a view can concede that all human
actions must originate with some kind of mental state, often styled a
volition or a willing; such a view can even concede that volitions or
willings are an intention of a certain kind (Moore 1993, Ch. 6).
Indeed, such source of human actions in willing is what plausibly
connects actions to the agency that is of moral concern on the
agent-centered version of deontology. Yet to will the movement of a
finger on a trigger is distinct from an intention to kill a person by
that finger movement. The act view of agency is thus distinct from the
intentions (or other mental state) view of agency.


On this view, our agent-relative obligations and permissions have as
their content certain kinds of actions: we are obligated not to
kill innocents for example. The killing of an innocent of
course requires that there be a death of such innocent, but there is
no agency involved in mere events such as deaths. Needed for there to
be a killing are two other items. One we remarked on before:
the action of the putative agent must have its source in a willing.
But the other maker of agency here is more interesting for present
purposes: the willing must cause the death of the innocent
for an act to be a killing of such innocent. Much (on this
view) is loaded into the requirement of causation.


First, causings of evils like deaths of innocents are
commonly distinguished from omissions to prevent such deaths.
Holding a baby’s head under water until it drowns is a killing;
seeing a baby lying face down in a puddle and doing nothing to save it
when one could do so easily is a failure to prevent its death. Our
categorical obligations are usually negative in content: we are not to
kill the baby. We may have an obligation to save it, but this will not
be an agent-relative obligation, on the view here considered, unless
we have some special relationship to the baby.


Second, causings are distinguished from allowings
(Woollard, 2015, 2023). In a narrow sense of the word we will here
stipulate, one allows a death to occur when: (1) one’s
action merely removes a defense the victim otherwise would have had
against death; and (2) such removal returns the victim to some morally
appropriate baseline (Kamm 1994, 1996; MacMahan 2003). Thus,
mercy-killings, or euthanasia, are outside of our deontological
obligations (and thus eligible for justification by good consequences)
so long as one’s act: (1) only removes a defense against death
that the agent herself had earlier provided, such as disconnecting
medical equipment that is keeping the patient alive when that
disconnecting is done by the medical personnel that attached the
patient to the equipment originally; and (2) the equipment could
justifiably have been hooked up to another patient, where it could do
some good, had the doctors known at the time of connection what they
know at the time of disconnection.


Third, one is said not to cause an evil such as a death when
one’s acts merely enable (or aid) some other agent to
cause such evil (Hart and Honore 1985). Thus, one is not categorically
forbidden to drive the terrorists to where they can kill the policeman
(if the alternative is death of one’s family), even though one
would be categorically forbidden to kill the policeman oneself (even
where the alternative is death of one’s family) (Moore 2008).
Nor is one categorically forbidden to select which of a group of
villagers shall be unjustly executed by another who is pursuing his
own purposes (Williams 1973).


Fourth, one is said not to cause an evil such as a death when
one merely redirects a presently existing threat to many so that it
now threatens only one (or a few) (Thomson 1985). In the time-honored
example of the run-away trolley (Trolley), one may turn a trolley so
that it runs over one trapped workman so as to save five workmen
trapped on the other track, even though it is not permissible for an
agent to have initiated the movement of the trolley towards the one to
save five (Foot 1967; Thomson 1985).


Fifth, our agency is said not to be involved in mere
accelerations of evils about to happen anyway, as opposed to
causing such evils by doing acts necessary for such evils to
occur (G. Williams 1961; Brody 1996). Thus, when a victim is about to
fall to his death anyway, dragging a rescuer with him too, the rescuer
may cut the rope connecting them. Rescuer is accelerating, but not
causing, the death that was about to occur anyway.


All of these last five distinctions have been suggested to be part and
parcel of another centuries-old Catholic doctrine, that of the
doctrine of doing and allowing (see the entry on
 doing vs. allowing harm)
 (Moore 2008; Kamm 1994; Foot 1967; Quinn 1989). According to this
doctrine, one may not cause death, for that would be a
killing, a “doing;” but one may fail to prevent death,
allow (in the narrow sense) death to occur, enable another to cause
death, redirect a life-threatening item from many to one, or
accelerate a death about to happen anyway, if good enough consequences
are in the offing. As with the Doctrine of Double Effect, how
plausible one finds these applications of the doctrine of doing and
allowing will determine how plausible one finds this cause-based view
of human agency.


A third kind of agent-centered deontology can be obtained by simply
conjoining the other two agent-centered views (Hurd 1994). This view
would be that agency in the relevant sense requires both intending and
causing (i.e., acting) (Moore 2008). On this view, our agent-relative
obligations do not focus on causings or intentions separately; rather,
the content of such obligations is focused on intended
causings. For example, our deontological obligation with respect
to human life is neither an obligation not to kill nor an obligation
not to intend to kill; rather, it is an obligation not to
murder, that is, to kill in execution of an intention to
kill.


By requiring both intention and causings to constitute human agency,
this third view avoids the seeming overbreadth of our obligations if
either intention or action alone marked such agency. Suppose our
agent-relative obligation were not to do some action such as
kill an innocent—is that obligation breached by a merely
negligent killing, so that we deserve the serious blame of having
breached such a categorical norm (Hurd 1994)? (Of course, one might be
somewhat blameworthy on consequentialist grounds (Hurd 1995), or
perhaps not blameworthy at all (Moore and Hurd 2011).) Alternatively,
suppose our agent-relative obligation were not to intend to
kill—does that mean we could not justify forming such an
intention when good consequences would be the result, and
when we are sure we cannot act so as to fulfill such intention (Hurd
1994)? If our agent-relative obligation is neither of these alone, but
is rather, that we are not to kill in execution of an intention to
kill, both such instances of seeming overbreadth in the reach of our
obligations, are avoided.


Whichever of these three agent-centered theories one finds most
plausible, they each suffer from some common problems. A fundamental
worry is the moral unattractiveness of the focus on self that is the
nerve of any agent-centered deontology. The importance of each
person’s agency to himself/herself has a narcissistic flavor to
it that seems unattractive to many. It seemingly justifies each of us
keeping our own moral house in order even at the expense of the world
becoming much worse. The worry is not that agent-centered deontology
is just another form of egoism, according to which the content of
one’s duties exclusively concern oneself; even so, the character
of agent-relative duties is such that they betoken an emphasis on self
that is unattractive in the same way that such emphasis makes egoism
unattractive. Secondly, many find the distinctions invited by the
Doctrine of Double Effect and the (five versions of the) Doctrine of
Doing and Allowing to be either morally unattractive or conceptually
incoherent. Such critics find the differences between
intending/foreseeing, causing/omitting, causing/allowing,
causing/enabling, causing/redirecting, causing/accelerating to be
morally insignificant. (On act/omission (Rachels 1975); on
doing/allowing (Kagan 1989); on intending/foreseeing (Bennett 1981;
Davis 1984).) They urge, for example, that failing to prevent a death
one could easily prevent is as blameworthy as causing a death, so that
a morality that radically distinguishes the two is implausible.
Alternatively, such critics urge on conceptual grounds that no clear
distinctions can be drawn in these matters, that foreseeing with
certainty is indistinguishable from intending (Bennett 1981), that
omitting is one kind of causing (Schaffer 2012), and so forth.


Thirdly, there is the worry about “avoision.” By casting
our categorical obligations in such agent-centered terms, one invites
a kind of manipulation that is legalistic and Jesuitical, what Leo
Katz dubs “avoision” (Katz 1996). Some think, for example,
that one can transform a prohibited intention into a permissible
predictive belief (and thus escape intention-focused forms of
agent-relative duty) by the simple expedient of finding some other end
with which to motivate the action in question. (This form of avoision
rather controversially assumes that we can will the reasons for which
we act no less than we can will whether we act.)


Such criticisms of the agent-centered view of deontology drive most
who accept their force away from deontology entirely and to some form
of consequentialism. Alternatively, some of such critics are driven to
patient-centered deontology, which we discuss immediately below. Yet
still other of such critics attempt to articulate yet a fourth form of
agent-centered deontology. This might be called the “control
theory of agency.” On this view, our agency is invoked whenever
our choices could have made a difference. This cuts across the
intention/foresight, act/omission, and doing/allowing distinctions,
because in all cases we controlled what happened through our
choices (Frey 1995). Yet as an account of deontology, this seems
worrisomely broad. It disallows consequentialist justifications
whenever: we foresee the death of an innocent; we omit to save, where
our saving would have made a difference and we knew it; where we
remove a life-saving device, knowing the patient will die. If
deontological norms are so broad in content as to cover all these
foreseeings, omittings, and allowings, then good consequences (such as
a net saving of innocent lives) are ineligible to justify them. This
makes for a wildly counterintuitive deontology: surely I can, for
example, justify not throwing the rope to one (and thus omit to save
him) in order to save two others equally in need. This breadth of
obligation also makes for a conflict-ridden deontology: by refusing to
cabin our categorical obligations by the distinctions of the Doctrine
of Double Effect and the Doctrine of Doing and Allowing, situations of
conflict between our stringent obligations proliferate in a
troublesome way (Anscombe 1962).

2.2 Patient-Centered Deontological Theories


A second group of deontological moral theories can be classified as
patient-centered, not agent-centered. These theories
are rights-based rather than duty-based; and some versions purport to
be quite agent-neutral in the reasons they give moral agents.


All patient-centered deontological theories are properly characterized
as theories premised on people’s rights. An influential version
posits, as its core right (often described by “the Means
Principle”), the right against being used only as means for
producing good consequences without one’s consent. Such a core
right is not to be confused with more discrete rights, such as the
right against being killed, or being killed intentionally. It is a
right against being used by another for the user’s or
others’ benefit. More specifically, this version of
patient-centered deontological theories proscribes the using
of another’s body, labor, and talent without the latter’s
consent. One finds this notion expressed, albeit in different ways, in
the work of the so-called Right Libertarians (e.g., Nozick 1974, Mack
2000), but also in the works of the Left-Libertarians as well (e.g.,
Steiner 1994; Vallentyne and Steiner 2000; Vallentyne, Steiner, and
Otsuka 2005). On this view, the scope of strong moral
duties—those that are the correlatives of others’
rights—is jurisdictionally limited and does not extend to
resources for producing the Good that would not exist in the absence
of those intruded upon—that is, their bodies, labors, and
talents. In addition to the Libertarians, others whose views include
this prohibition on using others include Quinn, Kamm, Alexander,
Ferzan, Gauthier, and Walen (Quinn 1989; Kamm 1996; Alexander 2016;
Alexander and Ferzan 2009, 2012; Gauthier 1986; Walen 2014, 2016).


Just as do agent-centered theories, so too do patient-centered
theories (such as that forbidding the using of another) seek to
explain common intuitions about such classic hypothetical cases as
Trolley, Transplant, and Fat Man (Thomson 1985). In Trolley, a runaway
trolley will kill five workers unless diverted to a siding where it
will kill one worker. Most people regard it as permissible and perhaps
mandatory to switch the trolley to the siding. By contrast, in
Transplant, where a surgeon can kill one healthy patient and
transplant his organs to five dying patients, thereby saving their
lives, the universal reaction is condemnation. (The same is
by-and-large true in Fat Man, where the runaway trolley cannot be
switched off the main track but can be stopped before reaching the
five workers by pushing a fat man into its path, resulting in his
death.)


The injunction against using arguably accounts for these contrasting
reactions. After all, in each example, one life is sacrificed to save
five. Yet there appears to be a difference in the means through which
the net four lives are saved. In Transplant (and Fat Man), the doomed
person is used to benefit the others. They could not be saved in the
absence of his body. In Trolley, on the other hand, the doomed victim
is not used. The workers would be saved whether or not he is present
on the second track.


Notice, too, that this patient-centered libertarian version of
deontology handles Trolley, Transplant et al. differently from how
they are handled by agent-centered versions. The latter focus on the
agent’s mental state or on whether the agent acted or caused the
victim’s harm. The patient-centered theory focuses instead on
whether the victim’s body, labor, or talents were the means by
which the justifying results were produced. So one who realizes that
by switching the trolley he can save five trapped workers and place
only one in mortal danger—and that the danger to the latter is
not the means by which the former will be saved—acts permissibly
on the patient-centered view if he switches the trolley even if he
does so with the intention of killing the one worker. Switching
the trolley is causally sufficient to bring about the consequences
that justify the act—the saving of net four
workers—and it is so even in the absence of the one
worker’s body, labor, or talents. (The five would be saved
if the one escaped, was never on the track, or did not exist.) By
contrast, on the intent and intended action versions of agent-centered
theories (but not on the cause-based versions), the one who switches
the trolley does not act permissibly if he acts with the
intention to harm the one worker. (This could be the case, for
example, when the one who switches the trolley does so to kill the one
whom he hates, only knowing that he will thereby save the other five
workmen.) On the patient-centered version, if an act is otherwise
morally justifiable by virtue of its balance of good and bad
consequences, and the good consequences are achieved without the
necessity of using anyone’s body, labor, or talents without that
person’s consent as the means by which they are achieved, then
it is morally immaterial (to the permissibility of the act
but not to the culpability of the actor) whether someone
undertakes that act with the intention to achieve its bad
consequences. (This is true, of course, only so long as the concept of
using does not implicitly refer to the intention of the user)
(Alexander 2016). And in assessing the culpability of risky conduct,
any good consequences must be discounted, not only by the perceived
risk that they will not occur, but also by the perceived risk that
they will be brought about by a using; for any such consequences,
however good they otherwise are, cannot be considered in determining
the permissibility and, derivatively, the culpability of acts
(Alexander 2016).


Patient-centered deontologists handle differently other stock examples
of the agent-centered deontologist. Take the acceleration cases as an
example. When all will die in a lifeboat unless one is killed and
eaten; when Siamese twins are conjoined such that both will die unless
the organs of one are given to the other via an operation that kills
the first; when all of a group of soldiers will die unless the body of
one is used to hold down the enemy barbed wire, allowing the rest to
save themselves; when a group of villagers will all be shot by a
blood-thirsty tyrant unless they select one of their numbers to slake
the tyrants lust for death—in all such cases, the
causing/accelerating-distinguishing agent-centered deontologists would
permit the killing but the usings-focused patient-centered
deontologist would not. As another example, consider that of Loop
Trolley (Thomson, 1985). Here, as in Trolley, a runaway trolley is
headed towards five trapped workmen who will be killed unless
bystander at the switch switches the trolley to a second track where
there is only one trapped workman. Unlike Trolley, in Loop Trolley the
second track loops around to rejoin the first track, meaning that
unless the body of the one trapped workman is on the second track to
stop the trolley, the five workmen would still be killed even if the
trolley is turned onto the second track. According to the
patent-centered deontology we are considering, the switchman now may
not switch the trolley to the second track because to do so
would be to “use” the first workman in saving the five
(this, because now the body of the one is needed to save the five);
whereas according to the agent-relative version of deontology, by
contrast, one may still redirect the runaway trolley.


The restriction of deontological duties to usings of another
raises a sticky problem for those patient-centered deontological
theories that are based on the core right against using: how can they
account for the prima facie wrongs of killing, injuring, and
so forth when done not to use others as means, but for some other
purpose or for no purpose at all? The answer is that such
patient-centered deontological constraints must be supplemented by
consequentialist-derived moral norms to give an adequate account of
morality. Killing, injuring, and so forth will usually be
unjustifiable on a consequentialist calculus, especially if
everyone’s interests are given equal regard. It is when killing
and injuring are otherwise justifiable that the deontological
constraint against using has its normative bite over and against what
is already prohibited by consequentialism. (This narrowness of
patient-centered deontology makes it counterintuitive to
agent-centered deontologists, who regard prohibitions on killing of
the innocent, etc., as paradigmatically deontological.)


The patient-centered version of deontology is aptly labeled
libertarian in that it is not plausible to conceive of not being aided
as being used by the one not aiding. Using is an action, not a failure
to act. More generally, it is counterintuitive to many to think that
any of us have a right to be aided. For if there were a
strong (that is, enforceable or coercible) duty to aid others, such
that, for example, A had a duty to aid X,
Y, and Z; and if A could more effectively
aid X, Y, and Z by coercing B and
C to aid them (as is their duty), then A
would have a duty to “use” B and C in
this way. For these reasons, any positive duties will not be
rights-based ones on the view here considered; they will be
consequentially-justified duties that can be trumped by the right not
to be coerced to perform them.


Patient-centered deontological theories are often conceived in
agent-neutral reason-giving terms. John has a right to the exclusive
use of his body, labor, and talents, and such a right gives everyone
equal reason to do actions respecting it. But this aspect of
patient-centered deontological theories gives rise to the virulent
form of the so-called paradox of deontology (Scheffler 1988; Heuer
2011)—that if respecting Mary’s and Susan’s rights
is as important morally as is protecting John’s rights, then why
isn’t violating John’s rights permissible (or even
obligatory) when doing so is necessary to protect Mary’s and
Susan’s rights from being violated by others? If all rights are
equally valuable, why isn’t it moral to violate one when doing so
prevents the violation of two? Patient-centered deontological theories
might arguably do better if they abandoned their pretense of being
agent-neutral. They could conceive of rights as giving agent-relative
reasons to each actor to refrain from doing actions violative of such
rights. Take the core right against being used without one’s
consent hypothesized earlier. The correlative duty is not to use
another without his consent. If such duty is agent-relative, then the
rights-based deontologist (no less than the agent-centered
deontologist) has the conceptual resources to answer the virulent form
of the paradox of deontology. That is, each of us may not use John,
even when such using of John would minimize usings of John by others
in the future. Such duties are personal to each of us in that we may
not justify our violating such a duty now by preventing others’
similar violations in the future. Such personal duties are
agent-centered in the sense that the agency of each person is central
to the duties of each person, so that your using of another
now cannot be traded off against other possible usings at other times
by other people. Patient-centered deontologies are thus arguably
better construed to be agent-relative in the reasons they give.

2.3 Contractualist Deontological Theories


Somewhat orthogonal to the distinction between agent-centered versus
patient-centered deontological theories are contractualist
deontological theories. Morally wrong acts are, on such accounts,
those acts that would be forbidden by principles that people in a
suitably described social contract would accept (e.g., Rawls 1971;
Gauthier 1986), or that would be forbidden only by principles that
such people could not “reasonably reject” (Scanlon
2003).


In deontology, as elsewhere in ethics, it is not entirely clear
whether a contractualist account is really normative as opposed to
metaethical. If such account is a first order normative account, it is
probably best construed as a patient-centered deontology; for the
central obligation would be to do onto others only that to which they
have consented. But so construed, modern contractualist accounts would
share the problems that have long bedeviled historical social contract
theories: how plausible is it that the “moral magic” of
consent is the first principle of morality? And how much of what is
commonly regarded as permissible to do to people can (in any realistic
sense of the word) be said to be actually consented to by them,
expressly or even implicitly?


In fact modern contractualisms look meta-ethical, and not normative.
Thomas Scanlon’s contractualism, for example, which posits at
its core those norms of action that we can justify to each other, is
best construed as an ontological and epistemological account of moral
notions. The same may be said of David Gauthier’s
contractualism. Yet so construed, metaethical contractualism as a
method for deriving moral norms does not necessarily lead to
deontology as a first order ethics. John Harsanyi, for example, argues
that parties to the social contract would choose utilitarianism over
the principles John Rawls argues would be chosen (Harsanyi 1973). Nor
is it clear that meta-ethical contractualism, when it does generate a
deontological ethic, favors either an agent centered or a patient
centered version of such an ethic.

2.4 Deontological Theories and Kant


If any philosopher is regarded as central to deontological moral
theories, it is surely Immanuel Kant. Indeed, each of the branches of
deontological ethics—the agent-centered, the patient-centered,
and the contractualist—can lay claim to being Kantian. The
agent-centered deontologist can cite Kant’s locating the moral
quality of acts in the principles or maxims on which the agent acts
and not primarily in those acts’ effects on others. For Kant,
the only thing unqualifiedly good is a good will (Kant 1785). The
patient-centered deontologist can, of course, cite Kant’s
injunction against using others as mere means to one’s end (Kant
1785). And the contractualist can cite, as Kant’s contractualist
element, Kant’s insistence that the maxims on which one acts be
capable of being willed as a universal law—willed by all
rational agents (Kant 1785). (See generally the entry on
 Kant.)
 
3. The Advantages and the Disadvantages of Deontological Theories


Having canvassed the two main types of deontological theories
(together with a contractualist variation of each), it is time to
assess deontological morality more generally. On the one hand,
deontological morality, in contrast to consequentialism, leaves space
for agents to give special concern to their families, friends, and
projects. At least that is so if the deontological morality contains
no strong duty of general beneficence, or, if it does, it places a cap
on that duty’s demands. Deontological morality, therefore,
avoids the overly demanding and alienating aspects of consequentialism
and accords more with conventional notions of our moral duties.


Likewise, deontological moralities, unlike most views of
consequentialism, leave space for the supererogatory. A deontologist
can do more that is morally praiseworthy than morality demands. A
consequentialist cannot, assuming none of the consequentialists’
defensive maneuvers earlier referenced work. For such a pure or simple
consequentialist, if one’s act is not morally demanded, it is
morally wrong and forbidden. Whereas for the deontologist, there are
acts that are neither morally wrong nor demanded, some—but only
some—of which are morally praiseworthy.


As we have seen, deontological theories all possess the strong
advantage of being able to account for strong, widely shared moral
intuitions about our duties better than can consequentialism. The
contrasting reactions to Trolley, Fat Man, Transplant, and other
examples earlier given, are illustrative of this.


Finally, deontological theories, unlike consequentialist ones, have
the potential for explaining why certain people have moral standing to
complain about and hold to account those who breach moral duties. For
the moral duties typically thought to be deontological in
character—unlike, say, duties regarding the
environment—are duties to particular people, not duties
to bring about states of affairs that no particular person has an
individual right to have realized. On the other hand,
deontological theories have their own weak spots. We here consider
three of the most prominent. First, and perhaps the most prominent, is
the paradox of deontology mentioned before with respect to
patient-centered versions of deontology. The virulent form of the
paradox—claiming conceptual incoherence for agent-neutral
versions of patient centered deontology—is not present in most
forms of deontology. Yet the moral form of the paradox is present for
all forms of deontology. It is this: if violations of categorical
norms are wrong (or bad), then are not more such
violations—whether by others or even by one’s future self
(Johnson, 2019)— more wrong (or worse) than fewer? If so, then
in situations where one wrongful act would prevent many more such
acts, do not the deontological norms prohibiting such acts require us
to act in ways that make the world morally worse? And is that not
extremely paradoxical?


One way of avoiding this paradox is to deny that the wrongness of acts
violative of deontological norms can be translated into the badness of
states of affairs (namely, the states of affairs constituted by such
acts having been done). Then two wrong acts would not be worse than
one, and, more generally, such wrongs could not be summed into
anything of normative significance. Such a response would reject the
comparability of states of affairs that involve violations and those
that do not, as well as the comparability of states of affairs that
involve more or fewer violations (Brook 2007). Such a response might
attempt to back these assertions by relying on the often-mentioned
“separateness of persons”: wrongs are always wrongs to
some person, and a wrong done to Y and a wrong done to Z cannot be
added because there is no person who suffers this amalgamated wrong
(cf. Taurek 1977). Whatever the attractions of this solution to the
paradox of deontology, they come at a high cost. In Trolley, for
example, one could not easily claim that it is not only permissible
but better to switch and save five (as is the common intuition). For
if wrongs to persons cannot be summed (because there is no person who
is the victim of the aggregated wrong), then harms to persons cannot
be summed either (for there is no person who suffers the aggregated
harm); five deaths is thus not worse than one death, and there is thus
no reason to switch to save the five. (Tenenbaum 2023) Worse yet, were
the trolley headed for the one worker rather than the five there would
be no reason not to switch the trolley to kill the five rather than
the one. If the numbers don’t count, they seemingly don’t count either
way. For reasons such as these, few deontologists rely on Taurek’s
counterintuitive conclusion that the numbers don’t count. In
situations generally (not just in Trolley) where the choice is to save
a few or save many, many deontologists would save the many so as to
acknowledge the importance of each of the extra persons saved by the
choice; but other deontologists would flip a coin, use a weighted coin
flip, or regard either choice as equally acceptable (Broome 1998;
Doggett 2013; Doucet 2013; Dougherty 2013; Halstead 2016; Henning
2015; Hirose 2007; Hsieh et al. 2006; Huseby 2011; Kamm 1993;
Rasmussen 2012; Sauders 2009; Scanlon 2003; Suikkanen 2004; Timmerman
2004; Wasserman and Strudler 2003). The calculation becomes even more
complicated in situations where there is a difference between the
types of harm caused from the type of harm prevented, as when causing
the death of one innocent is the only way to prevent a million people
to have a headache (Tomlin 2017; Tadros 2019; Horton 2018, Steuwer
2022). The calculation becomes further complicated yet if the
entities to whom deontological duties are owed or who hold rights are
themselves of different moral status (Kagan 2019).


Going the other way to deal with the moral version of the paradox of
deontology has its own problems. That is, suppose one allows there to
be some translation of the wrongness of violating a deontological norm
into the badness of the state of affairs constituted by such a wrong
having been done; then the reason not to do some action violative of a
deontological prohibition—even when doing so will minimize the
future doings of that action—will have to compete with the
reason based on the maximization of good states of affairs. This
raises two questions for the deontologist: one, is there some form of
rationality, alternative to the maximization of the Good of the
consequentialists, that can make sense of pure norm-conformity as
generative of reasons for action? And two, how can we be certain that
the deontological norm-created reason for not doing the prohibited
action will always win out in competition with that reason in favor of
doing the action which is based on the minimization of future
violations; after all, deontological obligations come in different
stringencies, so why cannot violation of a modestly stringent
deontological prohibition be outweighed by the heavily weighted
goodness of preventing numerous future violations? To answer both
questions, the deontologist seemingly needs an account like that of
Joseph Raz’s idea of a “protected reason”: the norm itself
both has positive reason-giving potential and it negatively strips
(Raz: “excludes”) what otherwise would be good reasons of
their normal reason-giving potential (Raz 1999). Both of these ideas
require considerable elaboration and defense to be plausible (Moore
2025).


Both of these routes to solving the paradox of deontology are thus
problematic. The problem of how to account for the significance of
numbers without giving up deontology by adopting consequentialism, and
without resurrecting the paradox of deontology, is one that a number
of deontologists are now working to solve(e.g., Kamm 1996; Scanlon
2003; Otsuka 2006; Hsieh et al. 2006; Steuwer 2023). Until it is
solved, it will remain a huge thorn in the deontologist’s side.


A second crucial problem with which deontologists must grapple is the
problem posed by the conflicts that seem to exist between various
deontological obligations. (Please see entry on moral dilemmas.) It
would be a widely unfair morality—a kind of cruel joke on the
human race—as well as a violation of at least standard
deontic logic, for morality to admit of the possibility that an actor
would be simultaneously obligated both to do and to refrain from doing
some particular act. Kant’s bold proclamation that “a
conflict of duties … is inconceivable” (Kant 1797 [1965,
p. 25; AK 6: 224]) is the conclusion wanted, but reasons for believing
it are difficult to produce for those who hold that morality consists
of categorical norms.


One of the advantages claimed for agent-centered versions of
deontology is that the various agency-determining variables restrict
the scope of deontological obligations in ways that lessen the
possibilities of there being conflicts of deontological duties
(Anscombe 1962). In Trolley, for example, the switchman is not seen to
face a conflict of two deontological duties (a duty not to kill one
workman versus a duty not to kill five workmen); rather, if he does
not turn the trolley he is only omitting to save the five, not causing
their death, and if he turns the trolley he is only (redirectively)
allowing the death of the one, not causing that death, so on both
sides of the balance he acts outside of the scope of deontological
obligations (this is what makes him free to maximize good
consequences). Still, while such conflict-reducing possibilities are
real, few think it likely that they can be sufficient to eliminate
conflict entirely. Moreover, the more restrictive of scope such agency
limitations are made to be, the more they invite the kind of
manipulation and evasion of deontology’s norms that Leo Katz calls,
“avoision” (Katz 1996).


That leaves two alternative ways for the deontologist to reach the
desired Kantian conclusion that there can b e no conflict of
deontological duties. One is to go the route of the specificationist:
individuate the norms of deontology so finely that the content of each
contains priority rules and exceptions that resolve any apparent
conflict with all other such norms (see the entry on Rights). This
makes such apparent staples of deontology as the norm, “Do not
murder innocents,” into a mere epistemic aid that is
abbreviatory of much longer contents of true moral norms; what is
abbreviated in the true moral norm is something like, “don’t murder
innocents unless...[they are inadvertently going to kill you, they are
in extreme pain and request painless death, etc., etc.].” Many find
such specificationism implausible because it is (seemingly) so
after-the-fact and ad hoc. Others, however, find such
specificationism to be inevitable, not only because of its elimination
of conflict between duties but also because: (1) it is demanded by the
fine grained individuation of the kinds of moral wrongs a properly
proportionate retributive punishment scheme requires, finely
individuated wrongs requiring equally finely individuated norms whose
violation constitutes such wrongs (Hurd and Moore 2021); and (2)
because it lessens the need of deontology—a need whose
satisfaction is otherwise puzzling to non-theists (Williams
1973)—for there to be some general text of moral laws seemingly
requiring an authorative law-giver as its source.


The other well known approach to deal with the possibility of conflict
between deontological duties is to reduce the force of such duties to
that of only “prima facie” duties (Ross 1930,
1939). Then one can claim that all apparent conflicts of duties are in
reality conflicts between merely prima facie duties, which is
unproblematic so long as it does not infect what one is categorically
obligated to do as one’s concrete, over-all duty on some occasion
(Tohaneanu 2015). The adequacy of this line of response depends
mightily on two variables. One is what reasons count in overriding a
prima facie duty so that there is no corresponding all-out duty: are
these considerations limited to the reasons constituted by other
deontological norms, or do they include the reasons constituted by
good states of affairs? The second variable is usually put as the
difference between an epistemic reading of “prima
facie” and the substantive (or “pro tanto”)
reading. On the first reading there is no independent force to a
prima facie duty, it being only an epistemic aid to finding
what does have force which is the all-out duty; on the second reading
the prima facie duty does have force independently of its
corresponding all-out duty, but it is not the force of obligating
action but only of apologizing, compensating, etc., for not doing the
action one was prima facie (but not all-out) obligated to do.


These two variables chart the dangers and limitations of the
“prima facie duties” retort to the problem of
conflicting duties. If the existence of good states of affairs can
constitute the kind of reason that can block a prima facie duty from
being an all-out duty, then deontology so construed is in danger of
collapsing into consequentialism. This is particularly true if
“prima facie” is read epistemically—for then the
norms of deontology are mere epistemic aids to counting up what really
counts, which are good states of affairs. But it is also true of the
pro tanto reading (because even there the deontological bottom line
about what act one must do loses out to good consequences). If the
reasons that can block a prima facie duty from being an all-out duty
do not include good states of affairs but are limited to other
deontological norms, then the prima facie duties response to conflict
is in danger of collapsing into the specificationist response. This is
particularly obvious on the epistemic reading of “prima
facie”; for then the all-out duty’s content wholly depends
on how the content of all “prima facie” duties
interlock with one another via exceptions and priority rules. But this
is also true for the pro tanto reading of “prima
facie.” For again, what one is all-out obligated to do (as
opposed to apologize for not doing, etc.) includes the exceptions and
priorities that make the allowances needed to avoid conflict.


A third set of problems for deontology arise from the fact that there
are situations—unfortunately not all of them thought
experiments—where compliance with deontological norms will bring
about disastrous consequences (Zack 2023). To take a stock example of
much recent public discussion, suppose that unless A violates
the deontological duty not to torture an innocent person (B),
ten, or a thousand, or a million other innocent people will die
because of a hidden nuclear device. If A is forbidden by
deontological morality from torturing B, many would regard
that as a reductio ad absurdum of deontology.


Deontologists have six possible ways of dealing with what Robert
Nozick called, “moral catastrophes” (Nozick 1974),
although only two of these are very plausible. First, they can just
bite the bullet and declare that sometimes doing what is morally right
will have tragic results but that allowing such tragic results to
occur is still the right thing to do. Complying with moral norms will
surely be difficult on those occasions, but the moral norms apply
nonetheless with full force, overriding all other considerations.  We
might call this the Kantian response, after Kant’s endorsement
of the saying “fiat iustitia, pereat mundus”
[“do justice though the world perish”] (Kant 1795 [1996,
345]; AK 8:378).  One might also call this the absolutist conception
of deontology, because such a view maintains that conformity to norms
has absolute force and not merely great weight (Waldron 2012; Moore
and Waldron 2022).


The second plausible response is for the deontologist to abandon
Kantian absolutism for what is usually called “threshold”
or “moderate” deontology. A threshold deontologist holds
that deontological norms govern up to a point despite adverse
consequences; but when the consequences become so dire that they cross
the stipulated threshold, consequentialism takes over (Moore 1997,
ch. 17). A may not torture B to save the
lives of two others, but he may do so to save a thousand lives if the
“threshold” is higher than two lives but lower than a
thousand.


There are quite a few varieties of threshold deontology (Kagan 2019)
but two that are particularly worth distinguishing. On the simple
version, there is some fixed threshold of awfulness beyond which
morality’s categorical norms no longer have their overriding
force. Such a threshold is fixed in the sense that it does not vary
with the stringency of the categorical duty being violated. The
alternative is what might be called “sliding scale threshold
deontology.” On this version, the threshold varies in proportion
to the degree of wrong being done—the wrongness of stepping on a
snail has a lower threshold (over which the wrong can be justified)
than does the wrong of stepping on a baby.


There are also two ethical contexts for application of threshold
deontology that are worth distinguishing. Historically the context of
discussion garnering the most attention has been the override of
obligation done by reaching a threshold of awful consequences
prevented by doing what the obligation forbids doing. But equally
plausible is to think that the assertion of agent-centered
prerogatives also must yield once the assertion of such prerogatives
reaches a threshold of awful consequences by doing what the
prerogative permits (Moore 2012; Brennan 2018).


Threshold deontology—in all of its guises and in all of its
contexts of application—is an attempt to save deontological
morality from the charge of fanaticism in how it deals with moral
catastrophes (Similansky 2003; Cook 2018, Johnson, 2020). There is
some similarity to the “prima facie duty” version
of deontology developed to deal with the problem of conflicting
duties, yet threshold deontology is usually interpreted with such a
high threshold that it more closely mimics the outcomes reached by a
“pure,” absolutist kind of deontology.


Threshold deontology faces several theoretical difficulties. Foremost
among them is giving a theoretically tenable account of the location
of such a threshold, either absolutely or on a sliding scale
(Alexander 2000; Ellis 1992; Moore 2019; Arneson 2019; Cole 2019;
Alexander 2019). Why is the threshold for torture of the innocent at
one thousand lives, say, as opposed to nine hundred or two thousand?
An aspect of this problem is that whatever the threshold, as the dire
consequences approach it, counter-intuitive results appear to follow.
For example, it may be permissible, if we are one-life-at-risk short
of the threshold, to pull one more person into danger who will then be
saved, along with the others at risk, by killing an innocent person
(Alexander 2000). Also, there is some uncertainty about how one is to
reason after the threshold has been reached: are we to calculate at
the margin on straight consequentialist grounds, use an agent-weighted
mode of summing, or do something else? A final problem is that
threshold deontology threatens to collapse into a kind of
consequentialism. Indeed, it can be perhaps shown that the sliding
scale version of threshold deontology is extensionally equivalent to
an agency-weighted form of consequentialism (Sen 1982).


The remaining four strategies for dealing with the problem of dire
consequence cases all have the flavor of evasion by the deontologist.
Consider first the famous view of Elizabeth Anscombe: such cases (real
or imagined) can never present themselves to the consciousness of a
truly moral agent because such agent will realize it is immoral to
even think about violating moral norms in order to avert disaster
(Anscombe 1958; Geach 1969; Nagel 1979). Such rhetorical excesses
should be seen for what they are, a peculiar way of stating Kantian
absolutism motivated by an impatience with the question.


Another response by deontologists, this one most famously associated
with Bernard Williams, shares some of the “don’t think
about it” features of the Anscombean response. According to
Williams (1973), situations of moral horror are simply “beyond
morality,” and even beyond reason. (This view is reminiscent of
the ancient view of natural necessity, revived by Sir Francis Bacon,
that such cases are beyond human law and can only be judged by the
natural law of instinct.) Williams tells us that in such cases we just
act. Interestingly, Williams contemplates that such
“existentialist” decision-making will result in our doing
what we have to do in such cases—for example, we torture the
innocent to prevent nuclear holocaust.


Surely this is an unhappy view of the power and reach of human law,
morality, or reason. Indeed, Williams (like Bacon and Cicero before
him) thinks there is an answer to what should be done, albeit an
answer very different than Anscombe’s. But both views share the
weakness of thinking that morality and even reason runs out on us when
the going gets tough.


Yet another strategy is to divorce completely the moral appraisals of
acts from the blameworthiness or praiseworthiness of the agents who
undertake them, even when those agents are fully cognizant of the
moral appraisals. So, for example, if A tortures innocent
B to save a thousand others, one can hold that
A’s act is morally wrong but also that A is
morally praiseworthy for having done it.


Deontology does have to grapple with how to mesh deontic judgments of
wrongness with “hypological” (Zimmerman 2002) judgments of
blameworthiness (Alexander 2004). Yet it would be an oddly cohering
morality that condemned an act as wrong yet praised the doer of it.
Deontic and hypological judgments ought to have more to do with each
other than that. Moreover, it is unclear what action-guiding potential
such an oddly cohered morality would have: should an agent facing such
a choice avoid doing wrong, or should he go for the praise?


The last possible strategy for the deontologist in order to deal with
dire consequences is to distinguish moral reasons from
all-things-considered reasons and to argue that whereas moral reasons
dictate obedience to deontological norms even at the cost of
catastrophic consequences, all-things-considered reasons dictate
otherwise. (This is one reading of Bernard William’s famous
discussion of moral luck, where non-moral reasons seemingly can trump
moral reasons (Williams 1975, 1981); this is also a strategy some
consequentialists (e.g., Portmore 2003) seize as well in order to
handle the demandingness and alienation problems endemic to
consequentialism.) But like the preceding strategy, this one seems
desperate. Why should one even care that moral reasons align with
deontology if the important reasons (namely, the all-things-considered
reasons that actually govern decisions) align with
consequentialism?

4. Deontology’s Relation(s) to Consequentialism Reconsidered


The perceived weaknesses of deontological theories have led some to
consider how to eliminate or at least reduce those weaknesses while
preserving deontology’s advantages. One way to do this is to
embrace both consequentialism and deontology, combining them into some
kind of a mixed theory. Given the differing notions of rationality
underlying each kind of theory, this is easier said than done. After
all, one cannot simply weigh agent-relative reasons against
agent-neutral reasons, without stripping the former sorts of reasons
of their distinctive character.


A time-honored way of reconciling opposing theories is to allocate
them to different jurisdictions. Tom Nagel’s reconciliation of
the two theories is a version of this, inasmuch as he allocates the
agent-neutral reasons of consequentialism to our
“objective” viewpoint, whereas the agent-relative reasons
of deontology are seen as part of our inherent subjectivity (Nagel
1986). Yet Nagel’s allocations are non-exclusive; the same
situation can be seen from either subjective or objective viewpoints,
meaning that it is mysterious how we are to combine them into some
overall view.


A less mysterious way of combining deontology with consequentialism is
to assign to each a jurisdiction that is exclusive of the other. One
possibility here is to regard the agent-neutral reasons of
consequentialism as a kind of default rationality/morality in the
sense that when an agent-relative permission or obligation applies, it
governs, but in the considerable logical space where neither applies,
consequentialism holds sway; agent-relative permissions and
obligations in this sense “side-constrain” the
maximization of good states of affairs (Nozick, 1974). Remembering
that for deontologists who are threshold deontologists,
consequentialist reasons may still determine right action even in
areas governed by agent-relative obligations or permissions, once the
level of bad consequences crosses the relevant threshold.

4.1 Making no concessions to consequentialism: a purely deontological rationality?


In contrast to mixed theories, deontologists who seek to keep their
deontology pure hope to expand agent-relative reasons to cover all of
morality and yet to mimic the advantages of consequentialism. Doing
this holds out the promise of denying sense to the otherwise damning
question, how could it be moral to make (or allow) the world to be
worse (for they deny that there is any states-of-affairs
“worseness” in terms of which to frame such a question)
(Foot 1985). To make this plausible, one needs to expand the coverage
of agent-relative reasons to cover what is now plausibly a matter of
consequentialist reasons, such as positive duties to strangers.
Moreover, deontologists taking this route need a content to the
permissive and obligating norms of deontology that allows them to
mimic the outcomes making consequentialism attractive. This requires a
specificationist picture of morality’s norms that is extremely
detailed in content, so that what looks like a consequentialist
balance can be generated by a complex series of norms with extremely
detailed priority rules and exception clauses (Richardson 1990). Few
consequentialists will believe that this is a viable enterprise.

4.2 Making no concessions to deontology: a purely consequentialist rationality?


The mirror image of the pure deontologist just described is the
indirect or two-level consequentialist. For this view too seeks to
appropriate the strengths of both deontology and consequentialism, not
by embracing both, but by showing that an appropriately defined
version of one can do for both. The indirect consequentialist, of
course, seeks to do this from the side of consequentialism alone.


Yet as many have argued (Lyons 1965; Alexander 1985), indirect
consequentialism collapses either into: blind and irrational
rule-worship (“why follow the rules when not doing so produces
better consequences?”); direct consequentialism (“acts in
conformity to the rules rather miraculously produce better
consequences in the long run”); or nonpublicizability
(“ordinary folks should be instructed to follow the rules but
should not be told of the ultimate consequentialist basis for doing
so, lest they depart from the rules mistakenly believing better
consequences will result”). For more information, please see the
entry on
 rule consequentialism.
 Nor can the indirect consequentialist adequately explain why those
who violate the indirect consequentialist’s rules have
“wronged” those who might be harmed as a result, that is,
why the latter have a personal complaint against the former. (This is
true irrespective of whether the rule-violation produces good
consequences; but it is especially so when good consequences result
from the rule-violation.) The bottom line is that if deontology has
intuitive advantages over consequentialism, it is far from obvious
whether those advantages can be captured by moving to indirect
consequentialism, even if there is a version of indirect
consequentialism that could avoid the dire consequences problem that
bedevils deontological theories.

5. Deontology and Uncertainty About Outcomes


Recently, deontologists have begun to ask how an actor should evaluate
courses of action in which it is uncertain whether a deontological
constraint will be violated. For example, should one detonate dynamite
in a mining operation if there is a chance that the explosion will
cause the Fat Man to tumble into the path of the trolley that would
otherwise kill five? (Assume that were the chance the same that the
explosion would instead divert the trolley in Trolley, killing one but
saving five, the detonation would be permissible.) Or should one take
a drive to observe the scenery if there is a slightly increased chance
that, because of the possibility of traffic, doing so will cause one
to miss a lunch one had promised to attend? Whether deontological
constraints focus on agents’ intentions or beliefs, or whether
they focus on agents’ counting positively in their deliberations
others’ use as means, how should the uncertainty of outcomes be
taken into account by deontologists? This question has been addressed
by Aboodi, Borer, and Enoch (2008); Alexander (2016; 2018); Lazar
(2015; 2017a, 2017b, 2018); Smith (2014); Tarsney (2018); Tenenbaum
(2017) and Tomlin (2019).

6. Deontological Theories and Metaethics


Deontological theories are normative theories. They do not presuppose
any particular position on moral ontology or on moral epistemology.
Presumably, a deontologist can be a moral realist of either the
natural (moral properties are identical to or grounded in natural
properties) or nonnatural (moral properties are not themselves natural
properties even if they are nonreductively related to natural
properties) variety. Or a deontologist can be an expressivist, a
constructivist, a transcendentalist, a conventionalist, or a Divine
command theorist regarding the nature of morality. Likewise, a
deontologist can claim that we know the content of deontological
morality by direct intuition, by Kantian reflection on our normative
situation, or by reaching reflective equilibrium between our
particular moral judgments and the theories we construct to explain
them (theories of intuitions).


Nonetheless, although deontological theories can be agnostic regarding
metaethics, some metaethical accounts seem less hospitable than others
to deontology. For example, the stock furniture of deontological
normative ethics—rights, duties, permissions—fits uneasily
in the realist-naturalist’s corner of the metaethical universe.
(Which is why many naturalists, if they are moral realists in their
meta-ethics, are consequentialists in their ethics.) Nonnatural
realism, conventionalism, transcendentalism, and Divine command seem
more hospitable metaethical homes for deontology. (For example, the
paradox of deontology above discussed may seem more tractable if
morality is a matter of personal directives of a Supreme Commander to
each of his human subordinates.) If these rough connections hold, then
weaknesses with those metaethical accounts most hospitable to
deontology will weaken deontology as a normative theory of action.
Some deontologists have thus argued that these connections need not
hold and that a naturalist-realist meta-ethics can ground a
deontological ethics (Moore 2004).