
The Basics of Essay Writing 
Essay writing is an essential skill for any student, and the ability to 
produce clear, well-argued essays is fundamental to good coursework 
and written exams. This book offers all the superb guidance and 
advice you need to dramatically improve your essay writing skills 
– and your grades. 
The Basics of Essay Writing explains in Nigel Warburton’s 
acclaimed no-nonsense style why it is so important to write a good 
essay, and proceeds through a step-by-step exploration of exactly 
what you need to think about in order to improve. You will fnd help 
on how to: 
• focus on answering the question asked 
• research and plan your essay 
• build and sustain an argument 
• improve your writing style and tone. 
Packed full of handy tips and practical exercises, this book will give 
you the confidence to turn unruly piles of revision notes, 
coursework, or handouts into clear and focused essays. Students of 
all ages and in every subject area will fnd it an easy-to-use and 
indispensable aid to their studies. 
Nigel Warburton is Senior Lecturer at The Open University and 
a bestselling author. His other books include Thinking from A to Z 
(3rd edition), Philosophy: The Basics (4th edition), Philosophy: The 
Classics (3rd edition), Philosophy: The Essential Study Guide, The 
Art Question and Freedom, all published by Routledge. 

NIGEL WARBURTON 
The Basics of 
Essay Writing 
First published 2006 
by Routledge 
2 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon Oxon OX14 4RN 
Simultaneously published in the USA and Canada 
by Routledge 
711 Third Avenue, New York, NY 10017 
Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group, an informa business 
This edition published 2007 
© 2006, 2007 Nigel Warburton 
Typeset in Rotis 
by Keystroke, 28 High Street, Tettenhall, Wolverhampton 
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted 
or reproduced or utilised in any form or by any electronic, 
mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter invented, 
including photocopying and recording, or in any information 
storage or retrieval system, without permission in writing from 
the publishers. 
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data 
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library 
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data 
Warburton, Nigel, 1962– 
The basics of essay writing/Nigel Warburton 
p. cm. 
Includes bibliographical references. 
1. English language—Composition and exercises—Study 
and teaching (Secondary) 2. Report writing—Study and Teaching 
(Secondary) I. Title. 
LB1631. W246 2006 
808′.042′0712—dc22 
2005023377 
ISBN10: 0–415–43404–1 
ISBN13: 978–0–415–43404–1 
Contents 
Acknowledgements ix 
Introduction 1 
How to use this book 3 
Key points 4 
1 What’s the point? 5 
Writing essays 7 
Writing is thinking 8 
Cultivate good habits 9 
Key points 11 
2 Start writing 13 
Overcoming psychological obstacles 15 
Avoid the weight of unfnished business 17 
Do something rather than nothing 18 
Customise your approach 19 
Take breaks 19 
Less than perfect can be good enough 20 
Key points 21 
3 Answer the question 23 
The worst mistake 25 
Direct questions 26 
Instruction words 26 
Key points 29 
4 Research and planning 31 
Discover what you need to know 33 
v 
Contents 
Use reading lists 33 
Stop researching and write something 34 
Think on paper 35 
Use the Internet 36 
Key points 37 
5 Beginnings, middles, ends 39 
Beginnings 41 
Middles 42 
Ends 43 
Key points 43 
6 Making a case 45 
Defend your conclusion 47 
Paragraphs as units of thought 47 
Use signposts 48 
Keep to the point 49 
Consider counterarguments/counterexamples 50 
Argue to a conclusion 50 
Key points 51 
7 Plagiarism, quotation, reference 53 
Avoid plagiarism 55 
Use quotation marks 60 
Give clear references and a bibliography 60 
Key points 62 
8 The craft of writing 63 
Get the tone right 65 
Be economical with adjectives 67 
Punctuate effectively 67 
Use the active voice 70 
Avoid convoluted sentences 71 
Be concise 73 
vi 
Contents 
Avoid adverbs 73 
Avoid clichés 74 
Learn from others’ clarity 75 
Avoid these common mistakes 75 
Avoid sexist language 78 
Spelling 79 
Key points 82 
9 
The exam essay 83 
Understand the genre 85 
Be prepared 86 
Use active revision techniques 87 
Coping with exam nerves 88 
Read the questions 90 
Handwriting 90 
Key points 91 
10 Improving your writing 93 
Rewriting and editing 95 
Checklist 95 
Learn from feedback 96 
Learn from other students’ essays 96 
Eliminate bad habits 97 
Do you recognise yourself here? 98 
Key points 108 
Conclusion 109 
Good luck 111 
Bibliography and further reading 113 
Bibliography 115 
Further reading 115 
Internet resources 116 
vii 

Acknowledgements 
I am extremely grateful to my agent Caroline Dawnay at pfd for 
suggesting that I write this book, and to my editor at Taylor & 
Francis, Philip Mudd. I am also grateful for comments on the draft 
from publisher’s readers, and from Anna Motz, Lucy Thorp, and 
Peter Harrison. Many students at various universities and colleges 
have contributed to my understanding of the basics of essay writing 
without realising it. Thanks to them too. 
Nigel Warburton 
Oxford 2005 
ix 

Introduction 

How to use this book 
This book is for anyone who has to write essays. It covers the basics 
of the craft. Most people worry about writing essays, but if you have 
a reasonable grasp of your subject and the will-power to practise 
writing, you can make signifcant improvements very quickly. My 
aim has been to focus on what can really make a difference. Get the 
basics right and you can improve in your next essay. Don’t feel 
obliged to read the book from cover to cover. Dip into it. Find 
strategies that work for you. 
Remember, though, that reading this book shouldn’t be an alter-
native to writing. If you want to improve, then you need to write, 
not just read about writing. Otherwise, you will be like someone 
learning the theory of swimming but never dipping a toe in the 
water. There is no adequate substitute for learning through doing. 
One of the toughest aspects of essay writing is getting started. But 
writing won’t be enough: you need to be able to recognise your 
own strengths and weaknesses, and adapt your style accordingly. 
You will need to work on improving your writing, not just doing 
more of it. It isn’t the number of hours that you practise that matters; 
it is the quality of your practice that will determine what you 
achieve. This book should help you by providing a guide for self-
improvement. 
It is little use having an in-depth knowledge of your chosen 
subject if you lack the basic skills of written communication. But just 
a few hours of focused work could set you on the road to academic 
success. Good luck. 
3 
Introduction 
Key points 
• Practise essay writing: don’t just read about it. 
• The quality of practice is more important than the quantity. 
4 
1 
What’s the Point? 

Writing essays 
Essay writing is at the heart of education. Whatever you study, at 
some point you will be asked to write an essay. And if you aren’t, 
then you probably won’t ever weave together the different strands 
of what you’ve learnt. In humanities subjects – Literature, History, 
Philosophy and so on – students are judged on their essays. If you 
can’t write good essays, particularly under exam conditions, then 
you will never succeed in these areas. Some students fail to achieve 
their potential simply because they don’t understand the basic 
principles of essay writing. They can be convincing in discussion 
and know the subject well, but when it comes to writing an essay 
they fall apart. Talking about what you know isn’t enough (though 
it may be an important part of the learning process): you need to 
be able to make a clear and well-argued case in writing, based on 
appropriate research. This remains the most effective way to demon-
strate your understanding of your subject and your ability to use 
what you know. 
Many students, even those studying practice-based subjects, 
such as Fine Art or Photography, also have to write a dissertation. 
So do students in the sciences and social sciences. This can be 
daunting if you are not used to writing. But it needn’t be. The same 
principles of good essay writing apply to longer pieces of work. And 
these principles can be learnt. The process of putting together a 
coherent essay, short or long, is not a mystery, nor is it particularly 
complicated: you just have to build a good case for your conclusion 
and structure your whole essay around that aim. 
Some people seem to have natural writing talent: they can write 
well without putting much effort or thought into the process. But 
most of us have to devote time and energy to this activity. Nearly 
everyone can make significant improvements. Writing skills are 
7 
What’s the point? 
transferable, so progress here can have an impact on your whole 
academic career. The skills of clear writing, and of developing and 
supporting an argument, are fundamental to all non-fction writing 
and will probably be relevant to your professional life after college. 
If you turn to creative writing, many of the principles apply there 
too. But beyond that, writing can be a pleasure, particularly when 
you are in the fow of it, when it suddenly seems simple and all the 
ideas f t together almost by themselves. 
Writing is thinking 
Don’t make the mistake of thinking of an essay as copying out 
something you’ve already thought through in great detail. Some 
people assume they can’t begin to write until they have an almost 
perfect essay worked out in their head, or at least a sentence-by-
sentence essay plan. This is usually a mistake. For most of us, writing 
an essay is not a matter of listening to an internal voice dictating a 
pre-imagined essay. Getting down to writing is very important. It is 
often in the act of writing that the subject comes into focus for the 
frst time. I’ve had the experience in the middle of an examination 
of suddenly understanding the connections between different 
parts of a syllabus in a way that eluded me throughout my revision. 
Writing is a kind of thinking. 
When you have to defend a position in writing, to argue using 
your own examples, or to reason to a conclusion drawing only on 
relevant material, then you are forced to grapple with your subject 
in a new way. Don’t be tempted to put it off for too long. Not that 
planning is a bad idea. Most writers make at least sketchy plans 
before starting to write – a few headings, a few keywords, some 
arrows, perhaps, linking ideas, and a conclusion. Think of the plan 
8 
Cultivate good habits 
as part of the writing, though, not as something separate from the 
writing process. 
What begins as vague and unfocused gradually emerges as sharp 
and clear. Or at least that’s what it should feel like if you’ve got into 
the fow of planning. As you write, you should start to see where 
you need to do further research before you can say anything that is 
interesting, accurate and true. It really does make sense to say that 
you may not know what you think about the topic until you have 
tried to write about it. 
Cultivate good habits 
Skills are built on good habits. Habits are patterns of behaviour that 
you don’t need to think about, usually because you’ve practised 
them many times before. Once you’ve got into a good habit, life 
gets easier. But getting to that stage usually requires self-discipline. 
There are no guaranteed rewards for practising something badly. 
Repeating bad habits over and over only makes the habits harder 
to break. But even a few minutes a day of the right kind of practice 
can transform your ability. The secret of effective practice is to 
practise the right things and practise them well: you won’t be 
rewarded in proportion to the hours you put in. You might even 
reinforce bad habits; high-quality practice, however, always brings 
about improvement. 
If you want to play a musical instrument, you will have to learn 
the basics and practise them until you don’t need to think about 
them. Then you can concentrate on the structure and interpretation 
of the music and stop worrying about where to place your fngers. 
This is true for even the most talented musicians. The same holds 
for sports. When you see someone who kicks a football without any 
9 
What’s the point? 
effort, or is a graceful swimmer or dancer, you can be sure that they 
have put in many hours of practice to achieve this. Some people start 
with natural advantages; but we can all progress. If you want to play 
football for your country or win a major tennis championship, you 
will have to have a combination of in-born talent and a willingness 
to work on basic and advanced skills. Essay writing is no different 
in this respect. Learning to write well involves developing good 
habits until you no longer need to think about them. The best writers 
have natural advantages, but if you can read and understand this 
book, you can certainly bring your writing to a level adequate for 
university study. 
At frst you might fnd it tedious to be considering some of the 
aspects of essay writing that I cover here. You might even feel that 
you know all about the basics of essay writing already. Perhaps you 
do. If so, you don’t need this book. But most writers have areas they 
can improve, and following the guidelines given here could save you 
many hours of wasted effort. By the end of this book I hope you will 
recognise that good habits and solid basic skills are the keys that 
will unlock your potential. 
Remember that no one writes perfect essays. Nor is there a 
single right way to answer any essay question. There is always room 
for improvement; even the most brilliant writers can improve. 
You are reading this book, so presumably you feel that you need to 
work on some aspect of your own writing (unless someone forced 
you to read it ‘for your own good’). Even a small improvement here 
can have an impact on the grades you receive; it can also greatly 
enhance your enjoyment of the process. It is very satisfying to 
produce a well-crafted piece of writing, both because it makes 
sense of the subject matter, and also because of the pleasure of 
putting words together in a skilful and creative way. Your best hope 
of achieving this pleasure is to cultivate good writing habits. 
10 
Key points 
Key points 
• Essay writing is at the heart of most academic study. 
• Writing is a kind of thinking. 
• It is important to form good writing habits. 
• The best way to improve is to put in high-quality practice. 
11 

2 
Start writing 

Overcoming psychological 
obstacles 
Writing is a strange activity. If you have an essay to write, it is 
amazing how easy it is to fnd other things to do. Writer’s block – 
a total inability to write anything at all – is very rare. But the urge 
to do something other than write whenever you have writing to do 
is extremely common. Give someone an essay to write, and suddenly 
they will remember a list of urgent chores they have to perform 
before they get started on it. They might ‘need’ to eat or drink, tidy 
their desk, or go to the library, go shopping, do the washing up, or 
surf the Internet for suitable materials. As I’m writing this, I’m 
feeling a very strong desire to have a nap or at least to go and get 
myself a coffee to give myself more energy. But I know that this is 
largely my mind’s bid to get me to do something else – almost 
anything else – rather than write. Luckily I’ve made it to my word 
processor, and the words have started to come. But if I’d fallen asleep 
I would have taken a lot longer to get started. 
It is important to have a way worked out to begin your writing; 
otherwise, washing the dishes becomes the most important thing 
on earth – anything that will divert you from writing. Finally, 
one just has to shut up, sit down, and write. 
(Natalie Goldberg, 1998, p. 43) 
Professional writers are well aware of their own avoidance 
strategies, and of those urges to do something – anything – other 
than write. But these urges aren’t always excuses. Perhaps you do 
genuinely need to do some of these other things. For instance, to 
write well I know that I need energy. If I just took that nap now, 
perhaps I’d write much better. There is a whole series of books that 
tell business people they need to take a ‘power nap’, the short sleep 
15 
Start writing 
in the middle of the day that refreshes you and allows you to return 
to your work with a new vigour. It may be true that you need to do 
more research before you write that final version of your essay. 
However, the skill you need to acquire is the skill of beginning: the 
skill of getting to your desk, or wherever you work, and making a 
start. What I mean by this is that you should make sure that you at 
least begin to plan and write your essay. You should get in front 
of your computer screen or blank page of paper and make the frst 
moves even if you feel that there are many other things you also 
suddenly need to do. Once you’ve started the process, writing usually 
gets much easier and you may fnd your tiredness evaporating and 
your urge to do all those other things diminishing. 
For some reason, once you recognise the existence of this pattern 
of writing-avoidance, it is much easier to fnd strategies for getting 
down to work. Also, once you have something on paper or on the 
screen – even just a few words – everything starts to become more 
manageable. The task seems less daunting. 
Try some of these strategies and see what works for you. Give 
yourself rewards. Start with small, achievable goals, like writing 
for ten minutes or completing a paragraph, and then have a cup of 
coffee, a snack or a break. Perhaps play music while you work; use 
headphones if you are likely to disturb other people. It is completely 
up to you to decide what to play, but one option is to listen to the 
same music whenever you write so that it works at the level of 
a psychological association. Another is to play whatever appeals 
to you at the time, so that you associate writing with pleasure. 
This is also a good way of reducing the effect of irritating noises 
from outside. If you are feeling sluggish, play music that energises 
you; if you are stressed, choose something more relaxing. I wouldn’t 
recommend listening to a radio station or anything else that is 
talk based. It is probably too easy to be distracted from the words 
you are writing when you are listening to someone speaking. 
Don’t believe teachers who say ‘You can’t possibly write with your 
16 
Avoid the weight of unfnished business 
headphones on’: it’s just not true – indeed, some people write better 
like that. One of the best strategies is to listen to music you know 
well: that way you are less likely to be distracted by what you hear. 
The only worry is that if you become too dependent on music you 
might have diffculty writing under examination conditions, or in 
libraries or wherever it is diffcult or forbidden to listen to music. 
Here’s another strategy from a highly respected teacher of 
creative writing: 
Teach yourself as soon as possible to work the moment you sit 
down to a machine, or settle yourself with pad and pencil. If you 
fnd yourself dreaming there, or biting your pencil end, get up and 
go to the farthest corner of the room. Stay there while you are 
getting up steam. When you have your frst sentence ready, go 
back to your tools. If you steadily refuse to lose yourself in reverie 
at your worktable, you will be rewarded by fnding that merely 
taking your seat there will be enough to make your writing fow. 
(Dorothea Brande, 1983, p. 161) 
Avoid the weight of 
unfinished business 
A good reason for getting down to writing as soon as possible is 
that having an unfnished assignment hanging over you can have 
an unpleasant effect on most aspects of your life. Poor time man-
agement is a major source of stress and anxiety. Students who lurch 
from one essay crisis to another usually feel guilty, sleep badly 
(because they stay up very late trying to meet deadlines) and have 
a nagging sense that they really should be getting down to work. 
Lack of sleep can impact on everything you do from study to social 
17 
Start writing 
life. Unfortunately, good intentions here aren’t enough: you need 
to do the work to get out of this spiral. Remember that getting a 
few words down on paper may be enough to break that downward 
momentum. 
Do something rather than nothing 
A good strategy for completing a large task, such as writing an 
extended essay or dissertation, is to break it down into smaller, 
manageable tasks. Plan and write a particular paragraph or section 
rather than taking on the whole project in one go. Each of these 
shorter sections should be relatively simple to complete. Don’t be too 
ambitious at frst. Achieving a modest goal is far better than setting 
yourself targets that you may never achieve. It is very satisfying to 
fnish a short, well-crafted paragraph. Once you’ve started writing 
something, you will probably find that you want to continue 
on to the next paragraph and the next. If you fnd it diffcult to 
write the frst paragraph, select one part of the way through the 
essay that you know you can write, and write that one instead. Or 
write the concluding sentence of the whole essay and work back 
from that. The important thing is to get started. If you can’t bring 
yourself to write complete sentences, jot down a few headings. But 
write something. 
18 
Take breaks 
Customise your approach 
Writing is a skill that is closely linked to the kind of person you are. 
You need to fnd what works best for you, not simply try to adopt 
a way of working that suits someone else. You can of course learn 
from other people’s experiences and from other people’s writing, 
but you will need to adapt what you learn to the kind of writer you 
are capable of becoming. When a tutor sets an essay question, he or 
she does not have in mind one perfect essay that everyone ought to 
try very hard to write. There are usually many excellent ways of 
answering the same question. What you as an essay writer need to 
develop is a style of writing and an approach to writing that allows 
you to succeed within the limits of the particular course you are 
studying. Eventually this way of writing will be quite natural for 
you. At frst, however, you may fnd that you need to concentrate 
on the style, rather as when you frst learnt to ride a bicycle. Don’t 
be disconcerted by this; swift improvement in essay writing is 
possible. What you have to avoid is lapsing into old bad habits just 
because they are easy. 
Take breaks 
There is no need to work relentlessly until your head begins to nod 
and you eventually fall asleep at your desk. What will that achieve? 
Most people are only capable of writing when they are reasonably 
alert. Taking short breaks is important. It is a good idea to stand up 
and stretch from time to time; otherwise, you run the risk of tension 
building up in your muscles without your realising it. A writing 
session with short breaks every forty minutes or so will be far more 
productive than grinding on for several hours without a break at all. 
19 
Start writing 
Remember that you won’t be judged on the number of hours you 
spend trying to write, but by what you produce. You could spend 
fve hours or fve minutes on a paragraph, but what matters is the 
quality of your writing and argument, not your investment of time 
and intellectual energy. When you do take a break, as you should, 
make sure you actually get back to your desk afterwards. Watch out 
for those ‘must do’ distractions. When you take a break, look at the 
clock and decide on a time to start writing again. Stick to that time. 
Less than perfect 
can be good enough 
One common problem is that students set their own standards so 
high that they are always disappointed with what they produce. If 
you are a perfectionist you will never fnish anything because you 
will always be able to fnd fault with every sentence that you write, 
and probably will feel the urge to go back and improve it before 
moving on to the next sentence. If you begin writing believing 
that what you write in your frst draft will be more or less perfect, 
then you are unlikely to get very far with the draft. This kind of 
perfectionism is self-defeating. 
You need to recognise that an essay, and particularly at the draft 
stage, should only be above a threshold: it should be good enough. 
Striving after perfection in the early stages of any writing is counter-
productive; it can block the fow completely. Don’t get too critical 
too soon. Once you have managed a frst draft on paper, that is the 
time to eliminate as many of the minor faws as possible. By then 
you should be working on producing the best possible essay you can 
within your time and energy constraints; however, at an earlier 
20 
Key points 
stage, your aim should simply be to get a reasonably coherent draft 
written all the way through to its conclusion. 
Key points 
• Everyone fnds excuses not to write. 
• Putting off essay writing can ruin your social life. 
• Writing just a few words can get you started. 
• Find writing strategies that work for you. 
• Take breaks, but get back to work too. 
• Don’t aim for a perfect essay: it only has to be good enough. 
21 

3 
Answer the question 

Question: How many surrealists does it take to change a light 
bulb? 
Answer: a fsh. 
The worst mistake 
The worst mistake you can make in essay writing is failing to answer 
the question asked. Stop and reread this last sentence. It is a fairly 
obvious point, but if you don’t grasp it, you are unlikely to succeed 
academically. If there is the slightest chance that you will forget 
this basic principle, write it out on a large piece of paper and pin 
it to your noticeboard, or in front of wherever you work. Most 
students who don’t answer the question aren’t aware that they 
haven’t answered it. A strict marker may fail your essay completely, 
no matter how good it is in itself, if it doesn’t directly address the 
particular question asked. It is not enough to discuss a topic that 
relates to the one in the question. You must answer the very question 
set. ‘Am I really answering the question?’ should echo in your 
head all the time you are writing, and particularly when you are 
beginning a new paragraph or writing your conclusion. Eloquent 
digressions are a waste of ink. Never let the marker or examiner 
think ‘Yes . . . but so what?’ Answer the question. 
25 
Answer the question 
Direct questions 
If you are attempting to answer a direct question, you should give 
a direct answer. So, for example, if you are asked ‘What is the dra-
matic function of the porter’s scene in Shakespeare’s play Macbeth?’, 
your answer should include a very clear direct answer about the 
scene’s dramatic function. If you are asked ‘Does the porter’s scene 
in Macbeth achieve a heightening or a lessening of tension in the 
play?’, then be sure to demonstrate which of these two options you 
want to defend (assuming your answer isn’t ‘neither’ or ‘both’). 
Direct questions give you a focus for your concluding paragraph: 
that paragraph should address what has been asked head-on, as, in 
many cases, should your opening paragraph. 
Instruction words 
Essay questions or assignment titles usually contain instruction 
words such as ‘discuss’, ‘summarise’ or ‘criticise’. You should pay 
particular attention to these, otherwise you risk not answering the 
question set. It is worth underlining or circling the key instruction 
word to remind you to focus on it. I’ve listed some of them below, 
together with brief suggestions about what they are instructing 
you to do. You should, however, always think about the instruc-
tion words in their actual context. Some of my comments about the 
words listed below may not be relevant to the context of the question 
you are attempting; they are just there as broad guidelines. 
26 
Instruction words 
analyse: Analysis is usually a matter of taking things apart to see 
how the different parts contribute to the whole. 
assess: The crucial idea here is that you make some kind of value 
judgement about the matter. In other words, this instruction tells 
you very clearly that the examiner/marker wants you to come to a 
conclusion about the view being discussed. 
classify: Classification is about putting things into the correct 
classes. 
comment on: This instruction is usually followed by an idea, theory 
or quotation. You are invited to make critical judgements about this. 
compare and contrast: An invitation for you to show both what 
is similar and what is dissimilar about the explanations/accounts 
or whatever is under discussion. Be sure both to compare and to 
contrast. 
critically discuss: A critical discussion involves engaging with the 
ideas discussed, not just summarising them. 
defne : The principal meaning of this instruction is to give a clear 
defnition of something. This typically involves specifying the limits 
within which something has to fall for it to be that kind of thing. 
describe: An opportunity for you to give an account, perhaps a 
narrative, that is relatively free from critical judgements. 
detail: An invitation to provide another kind of description, in this 
case emphasising the component parts. 
discuss: A fairly open-ended invitation to engage critically with the 
subject. 
27 
Answer the question 
evaluate: Explain the relative worth of the idea or account, 
providing justifcation for your conclusion. 
explain: Spell out as if to an intelligent but relatively uninformed 
person. 
illustrate: Provide examples or instances that illuminate the points 
under discussion. 
interpret: Give a plausible account of the data, drawing conclusions 
from the evidence you have been given. 
justify: Provide the evidence and arguments that support the con-
clusion given. 
outline: Give a clear summary, but don’t go into too much detail. 
refute: Provide the evidence and arguments against the position 
given and show how a different conclusion follows. 
relate: Show the connections between. 
review: Summarise and assess. 
sketch: Give a clear overview of the main features without going 
into too much detail. 
state: Spell out. 
summarise: Select the main features and describe them clearly in 
your own words. 
trace: Show how a particular idea or event was caused by or evolved 
from earlier ones. 
28 
Key points 
Key points 
• The worst mistake you can make is not answering the question. 
• Answer direct questions with direct answers. 
• Pay particular attention to instruction words: make sure you know 
what the examiner is asking you to do, then do it. 
29 

4 
Research and planning 

Discover what you need 
to know 
One of the useful consequences of being set a specifc essay title or 
question to complete is that it focuses your reading. If you approach 
a topic without a formulated question, then everything you read 
about that topic is – at least potentially – relevant to your interest. 
In contrast, when you have a clear mission you will zoom in on 
the parts of your reading that are most relevant, and skim those that 
don’t relate directly to your topic of research. You become selective 
and driven. More creatively, when you are reading about an appar-
ently unrelated topic, if you have the question you are supposed to 
be writing an answer to playing in the background of your mind, 
you will very likely, without effort, see parallels and contrasts that 
help you to understand the topic of your essay better. 
Use reading lists 
You will probably have been given a reading list. This will 
recommend more pages of writing than you could possibly read 
thoroughly in the time allocated. You need to be selective from 
within the reading. If a whole book is included, there is a good 
chance that large sections of it won’t be relevant to the topic you 
are working on. So, be ruthless and put all your energy into the 
topics that are going to help you with your writing. Try to get an 
overview of a book before you get immersed in the details. Look 
carefully at the chapter headings for the information they contain. 
Skim the index to see where your main topic is most discussed in 
the book. Often the conclusion of a piece of writing gives extremely 
useful information about the general angle of the piece and the main 
33 
Research and planning 
arguments used. The key skill is getting straight to the relevant 
information or discussion. Don’t feel obliged to begin on page one 
and plod through an entire book or article. That is going to waste 
far too much time. Don’t feel guilty if you don’t read a book from 
cover to cover. Remember that you will be judged by what you write, 
not by what you have read, and that essays are designed to test your 
ability to select relevant information and present it in a lively and 
well-structured way. 
If you don’t fully understand some of the terms used, consult a 
specialist dictionary, such as a dictionary of literary terms, a dic-
tionary of psychology or a dictionary of philosophy. Some textbooks 
also include glossaries, which can be useful. Ordinary dictionaries 
are likely to be of only limited use. Don’t be shy about consulting 
introductory books: often they give a far clearer picture of the 
essence of a topic and its key concepts than do the more advanced, 
and occasionally jargon-laden, works that will most likely appear 
on your reading list. 
Stop researching and 
write something 
An important skill is being able to stop the research process and 
begin writing. Many students go deeper and deeper into their topic 
before they begin to make an essay plan. They feel the need to do 
all the reading they possibly can before committing themselves to 
a structure. This is usually a mistake. Obviously, before you can 
plan out the detail of your answer you will need to have a good idea 
of the key issues you want to discuss. But that is not an adequate 
excuse for putting off the planning and even the frst draft until 
34 
Think on paper 
you have very little time left in which to complete your assignment. 
Often it is only when you begin to plan your essay that you discover 
what you really need to know in order to give a good answer to the 
question. That might then take you back to your books and notes 
with a renewed enthusiasm and a specifc piece of information to 
fnd. 
Think on paper 
Some thinking is best done on paper. You leave traces, you can see 
what you just thought, and you can draw links with arrows, delete, 
underline, and so on, modifying what you originally thought. Yet 
some students insist on thinking through their essay plan in their 
heads in a rather vague way – a kind of unfocused daydreaming 
around the topic. For most of us, jotting down ideas, seeing con -
nections, capturing those thoughts that would otherwise drift just 
beyond memory, is the best way to approach the planning stage. 
Remember that no one else needs to see your plan. You should feel 
free to note possible directions your essay might take, but not to stick 
rigidly to these frst thoughts if later they are out of place in the fnal 
structure. 
You should try to establish your essay’s structure as soon as 
possible. This involves working out what your angle on the question 
is, what your conclusion is going to be, what your main arguments 
are, and any counterarguments you are considering. You should be 
able to answer the following questions before beginning to write: 
1 What is your main conclusion? 
2 What arguments or evidence are you going to use to arrive at 
this conclusion? 
3 Are there any counterarguments you need to consider? 
35 
Research and planning 
You should also be asking yourself, even at the planning stage, 
‘Am I really answering the question set?’ Your conclusion should be 
a direct response to that question. Having this written out on paper 
before you begin writing the essay is extremely useful. 
Use the Internet 
The Internet is a convenient source of huge amounts of unfltered 
information and misinformation, some of it parasitic on unreliable 
evidence that gets recycled and paraphrased for each website. 
Much of what is available there would never have been published 
in a book – or at least not one published by a reputable publisher. 
Consequently, much of the information students download from the 
Internet is unreliable, and some is completely misleading. But even 
where the information is reliable, you should resist the temptation 
to cut and paste chunks of other people’s writing into your essay. 
One reason is that this may amount to plagiarism (see Chapter 7). 
Just as importantly, students who use the Internet in this way often 
fail to analyse the material they quote in such large segments. 
Anyone can do an Internet search and then copy large amounts of 
information into an essay. The skill is in being selective and building 
up an argument to a conclusion using only material that is relevant 
to the question asked. Unless you develop your critical skills through 
thinking in writing about your subject, you won’t develop as an 
essay writer, and you won’t be awarded high marks. 
It is also easy to get sidetracked into surfng the Internet as a 
possible source of ideas and waste many hours in the process. It is, 
however, particularly good for fnding missing references (online 
library catalogues from reputable libraries, such as the British 
Library, the Cambridge University Library and the Oxford University 
36 
Key points 
Bodleian Library, are very useful for this). The Internet is also good 
for fnding facts, such as someone’s date of birth or death, and his 
or her publications. You can also fnd reproductions of images, and 
these can be helpful for art historians, particularly when checking 
a detail of something you have seen elsewhere. 
When using the Internet as a source, it is important only to get 
information from reliable sites. University websites are one starting 
point, as is the BBC. Be sceptical, though, about any information you 
fnd, and, if possible, double-check it. 
Key points 
• Having a formulated question will focus your research. 
• Concentrate only on what is strictly relevant to your essay. 
• Write a plan. 
• Start writing sooner rather than later. 
• Establish your conclusion and plan around that. 
• Know the kinds of evidence you are going to use to support your 
conclusion. 
• Don’t waste time surfing the Internet; use it wisely and avoid 
cutting and pasting. 
37 

5 
Beginnings, middles, ends 

Beginnings 
The blank sheet of paper, or, more often, the blank screen can be 
intimidating. You’ve planned your essay. You’re ready. What next? 
How can you begin? Many student writers open their essays with 
rather vague speculation around the subject; some never get their 
essay on the right track again. The best opening lines, in contrast, 
are crisp and to the point. They often summarise the writer’s con-
clusion or angle on the question asked and drive the essay forward 
from that point. The rest of the essay then builds a case to that 
conclusion. 
Don’t be tempted to fall back on dictionary defnitions of key 
terms as a way of getting your essay launched. This is a clichéd way 
to open an essay, and almost always a mistake. It is a good idea to 
defne or clarify keywords early on in the essay, to make clear what 
you are discussing. Copying out a dictionary defnition, however, 
is often an avoidance of the more diffcult and more interesting task 
of defning the word or phrase as it is used in the context implied 
by the question. Dictionaries are not likely to be particularly helpful 
with this sort of issue. If you can’t resist the temptation to begin with 
a dictionary defnition, try this strategy. Write your introductory 
sentence based on the definition; then delete it. Was anything 
important lost? Probably not. If not, don’t reinstate it. 
Most markers form an opinion of the essay writer’s ability 
very early on. First impressions are extremely important. One of the 
best ways of creating a good frst impression is to show that you are 
engaging immediately and critically with the specific question 
asked. Use some of the words of the question and engage with it 
head-on, steering the reader towards your argument and the case 
you make for your conclusion. If you are really struggling with those 
opening lines, then postpone writing them: pick a paragraph later 
on in your essay that you know you can write, and write that. 
41 
Beginnings, middles, ends 
One of the delights of writing on a word processor is that you aren’t 
obliged to write in the order you will be read. You can begin at 
the end of an essay, then write the introduction, then write the 
middle. When writing by hand, or using a typewriter, unless you are 
prepared to rewrite material it is very diffcult to do this. 
Middles 
The middle of your essay is the flling in your sandwich. This is 
where your main argument takes place. Here each paragraph should 
do two things: 
1 make a relevant point; 
2 back it up with some kind of evidence, quotation, argument or 
example. 
It really is that simple. There is no mystery about what each para-
graph should do, but teachers rarely point this out to students. If you 
write a paragraph that fails to do either of these, then it probably 
won’t make an important contribution to your essay. Obviously, the 
point that you make should be relevant to the question asked and 
should contribute to the case you are making for your conclusion. 
So, a third important feature of at least some of your paragraphs 
should be: 
3 a sentence showing the relevance of what you have just said 
to the question asked. 
Every paragraph that makes a relevant point and provides some 
evidence, quotation, argument or example to back it up contributes 
to your essay and moves it towards the goal of a well-supported 
conclusion. 
42 
Key points 
Ends 
The ending of your essay pulls the threads together and makes sure 
that your readers get the point of everything else included in the 
essay. Good concluding paragraphs can be very brief, sometimes 
even just a few sentences. A conclusion that replays the whole argu-
ment just set out is of no use to anyone. Trees shouldn’t die to have 
you write the same thing twice (or in some cases three times). A 
concluding paragraph should refer back to the question, preferably 
picking up on the keywords of the question, and state very clearly 
your angle towards it. Avoid the temptation to end with a pithy 
statement or rhetorical question. Rhetorical questions are questions 
that are made for effect rather than to be answered. They are easy 
to write, but if you ask them you should answer them. Ending an 
essay with a rhetorical question will undermine your essay. Worse 
still is a string of rhetorical questions. The examiner or marker 
expects you to answer questions, not set new ones and leave them 
hanging. 
Never end an academic essay with an exclamation mark, the 
crude punctuational equivalent of a nudge in the ribs: that’s like 
saying ‘Geddit?’ at the end of a joke. Remember that the last impres-
sion you leave is the freshest in the reader’s mind. For that reason, 
too, you should stop when you reach the end: don’t keep tacking 
on further thoughts, otherwise you risk diluting the impact of your 
conclusion. 
Key points 
• First impressions are important: make sure your opening sentences 
are crisp and address the question. 
43 
Beginnings, middles, ends 
• In the middle of your essay, each paragraph should make a point 
and back it up with some kind of evidence. 
• Your conclusion needn’t be long, but it should draw the threads 
of your argument together. 
44 
6 
Making a case 

Defend your conclusion 
Think of your essay as an exercise in defending a conclusion and 
how you arrived at it. You should always have an angle on the 
question asked (i.e. you should know what you think about the main 
topic, or at least know the particular stance you are going to take 
on the issue for the sake of writing the essay). You will defend your 
conclusion by considering arguments and evidence for it, and, to a 
certain extent, against it too. By considering counterarguments and 
evidence against your own position, and demonstrating why these 
do not undermine your reasoning to your conclusion, you demon-
strate the strength of your own arguments. 
By the end of the essay the reader should be completely clear 
about where you stand on the question asked. If you’re not clear 
about this, your reader certainly won’t be. Your writing should be 
persuasive: that is, an intelligent person reading your essay should 
see the logic of your argument, the power of the evidence you 
provide in support of it, and so the rightness of your conclusion. 
Even if they disagree with you, they should be able to understand 
how you arrived at your conclusion and why you believe the weight 
of evidence lies in its favour. 
Paragraphs as units of thought 
The chief thing to remember is that, although paragraphing loses 
all point if the paragraphs are excessively long, the paragraph is 
essentially a unit of thought, not of length. 
(Ernest Gowers, 1987, p. 170) 
47 
Making a case 
Paragraphs reveal the structure of your essay. They are the building 
blocks of your thought. There is no single right way to use para-
graphs, but there are many confusing and irritating ways to use 
them. Starting a new paragraph every sentence is one of the more 
annoying twitches that some student essay-writers have – a style 
of writing perhaps derived from some tabloid journalism. It makes 
paragraphing redundant, as the full stop is doing exactly the same 
work as the paragraphing. It also has a stop–start feel to it, pre -
venting the fow of ideas and making life hard for your reader. 
Extremely long paragraphs are no use to anyone either, as 
the quotation from Ernest Gowers above makes clear. Well used, 
paragraphs can show when the author is addressing a new idea. If, 
however, your essay is just one long paragraph, or perhaps two or 
three (a beginning, a middle and an end), then very little is commu-
nicated by paragraphing. That is a very important opportunity 
missed. 
Use signposts 
The best essays use signposts to help the reader understand their 
structure. Signposts are sentences that give a clear indication of 
what the main topics covered in the paragraph are likely to be. For 
example, in an essay about the causes of the First World War, a 
student might write ‘There were three main causes of the war’ or ‘The 
main cause of the war was . . .’ or ‘The second main cause of the war 
was . . .’ or ‘Several historians have argued against this conclusion. 
For instance, . . .’ or ‘To conclude . . .’ These sentences and phrases 
prepare the reader for what is to come in the rest of the paragraph. 
Ideally, you should begin every paragraph with some kind of 
summary of the main point of that paragraph, or at least a sentence 
48 
Keep to the point 
that identifes what its main topic is. If you do this well, you should 
be able to take the frst line of each paragraph and reconstruct the 
structure of the whole essay from this alone. Try it on an essay you 
wrote some time ago. Is it possible to add a few extra signpost 
sentences to help the reader see how the different parts of the essay 
ft together? If you have written a draft of an essay, go back over 
it and check that the frst sentence of each paragraph is informa-
tive and provides directions to the reader about the function and 
content of that paragraph. Don’t assume that the reader can simply 
follow the logic of your argument: make that logic visible with 
signposts. 
Keep to the point 
Don’t digress. One key skill tested in essay writing, particularly in 
exams, is the ability to keep to the point. Every word you use in an 
interesting but irrelevant aside is a word wasted: you should want 
every word to count. The person reading your essay should never 
be able to think ‘Yes, but so what?’ The relevance of everything 
included should either be obvious or else be stated clearly. Keeping 
to the point is an aspect of answering the question set (rather than 
a different one), and so is crucial if you want to avoid the worst 
mistake of essay writing: failing to answer the question. At the very 
least, irrelevant material dilutes the power of your argument. It gives 
the marker the impression that you are not concentrating your 
efforts on the question set, but perhaps padding out your answer 
with some of the things that you have learnt and which you feel you 
want to get into the essay whatever question is set. 
49 
Making a case 
Consider counterarguments/ 
counterexamples 
When you are making a case, a good way of developing your argu-
ment is by considering what can be said against it, and then 
responding to this imagined criticism. This involves playing differ-
ent roles within the essay: sometimes putting your own arguments 
forward, sometimes addressing those arguments from the perspec-
tive of a critic. When you engage in this dialogue with yourself it 
is very important that you give clear signposts about which role 
you are taking at any particular point. So, for example, if you are 
defending the idea that the religious arguments against abortion 
outweigh any liberal arguments about women’s rights to choose 
what happens in and to their bodies, then you will probably want 
to consider those liberal arguments in a strong form. When you 
introduce these counterarguments, you should use a signpost phrase 
such as ‘Despite the powerful arguments about the sanctity of life, 
liberal philosophers such as Judith Jarvis Thomson have put a strong 
case for the view that a woman’s right over her body should be 
paramount . . .’ Then, if you have a reply to the liberal arguments, 
you need another signpost, such as ‘A strong criticism of the liberal 
arguments above is . . .’ 
Argue to a conclu sion 
You’ve got to be careful if you don’t know where you’re going 
’cause you might not get there. 
(Yogi Berra, 1998) 
50 
Key points 
The most important feature of a case well made is the conclusion, 
which should follow logically from what has gone before. Avoid 
the temptation to leave the readers to judge for themselves what the 
best answer to the question is: show them the way to your con-
clusion, and then provide it, leaving them in no doubt where you 
stand and why. The body of your essay should support your overall 
conclusion. And when you have reached your conclusion, stop. 
Key points 
• Make a case for your conclusion. 
• Use paragraphs to develop the structure of your argument. 
• Signpost sentences help the reader understand your essay’s logic. 
• Everything in your essay should be relevant to the question set. 
Cut irrelevant material. 
• Don’t leave the reader in any doubt about your conclusion or about 
the evidence supporting it. 
51 

7 
Plagiarism, quotation, 
reference 

Avoid plagiarism 
plagiarise: to steal from (the writings or ideas of another) 
(Chambers Dictionary, 1998) 
Plagiarism is passing off someone else’s work as your own. Don’t 
do it. It is a dangerous and immoral thing to do. And sometimes 
it is illegal. This is obvious. If I had copied out large sections of 
someone else’s book and then published it as if it were my own 
words, then I would have done something that is both immoral 
and illegal. I would have stolen their work and passed it off as if I 
had written it myself. Copyright laws provide authors with a defence 
against this sort of theft, but these laws don’t just apply to published 
authors: they apply to students too. 
In the age of the Internet it is very easy for students to get access 
to other students’ writing and to copy and paste it into their essays 
as if it were their own work. If you are rich enough and foolish 
enough, you can also buy other people’s essays on the Internet. 
Many who do this then simply hand the essays in with their own 
name on them. 
Copying from books without using quotation marks or refer -
ences to indicate that words are not your own is the traditional form 
of plagiarism, and it is still quite common. Even if you do this by 
mistake, perhaps because of poor note-taking that doesn’t distin-
guish your own thoughts from someone else’s, you are very likely 
to be accused of plagiarism if found out. The severity of penalty 
for plagiarism varies, but in extreme cases students will be given a 
mark of zero and prevented from retaking exams. They may even 
be prosecuted. 
Anyone who uses this approach to education lacks imagination. 
Apart from the moral and legal issues, plagiarism is foolish for 
several other reasons too. First, you are likely to get caught: software 
55 
Plagiarism, quotation, reference 
now exists that is very good at tracking down stolen words. And if 
you are caught, the consequences are likely to be very serious. 
Second, even if you get away with it, you lose the opportunity 
of thinking things through for yourself. As I have already stressed, 
writing is a kind of thinking. If you don’t write your own essays, you 
will never get many of the benefts of education. You may end up 
passing a course without really understanding anything. You might 
not regret this immediately, but looking back in later years you will 
very likely recognise a lost opportunity and a bad decision. If you 
get into a college or get a job on the basis of this sort of cheating, 
you may get found out at a later stage and your whole career could 
be undermined. You may end up feeling that you are a fraud, even 
if no one else ever knows what you have done. 
The simplest way to avoid the charge of plagiarism is to be 
systematic about your use of references and to use quotation marks 
whenever you use someone else’s words. This is important in your 
notes as well as in your essays: it is very easy when coming back 
to notes written months earlier to forget that the words weren’t 
your own but someone else’s. This is a common cause of accidental 
plagiarism and is far less blameworthy than deliberate deception. 
Try to establish good habits in this matter, always using quotation 
marks to indicate quotations even in very rough drafts of your 
essays. 
Can you plagiarise your own work? Probably not. But you 
should acknowledge that you have already written the same words 
in a different context, particularly if there is likely to be a question 
of whether you have had the same piece of work count twice towards 
a grade. In that spirit, I’d like to acknowledge that I’ve already used 
the fve examples below in a study skills book directed specifcally 
at philosophy students, Philosophy: The Essential Study Guide 
(Warburton, 2004): 
56 
Avoid plagiarism 
Plagiarism, paraphrase and exposition: fve examples 
1 If the sceptic is right, then each of us is in an important way 
detached from the world around us. You know nothing about 
the world out there. You have no reason at all to believe that you 
inhabit a world of trees, houses, cats, dogs, mountains and cars. 
And you have no reason at all to think that you are surrounded 
by other people. For all you know, your entire world – including 
all the people in it – is merely virtual. 
Comment: This is a direct yet unacknowledged quotation from 
p. 53 of Stephen Law’s excellent introduction to philosophy, The 
Philosophy Files (London: Orion, 2000). The only difference between 
what is written above and what is in the book is that I have removed 
two comments which are in brackets in the original. If I had written 
this as a paragraph in a philosophy essay without quotation marks 
or acknowledgement of its source, it would be a clear case of plagia-
rism. It would still be counted as plagiarism even if I had simply 
forgotten to put in the quotation marks; though I might not be so 
culpable, it is unlikely that anyone marking this would give me the 
benef t of the doubt. 
2 Imagine for the sake of argument that the sceptic is right. 
In that case each of us is in an important way detached from the 
external world. We know nothing of the world out there. We 
have no reason at all to believe that there are trees, houses, cats, 
mountains, etc. For all you know, your whole world, including 
everyone in it, is a virtual one. 
Comment: Again this is plagiarism, though not in such a blatant 
form as in the frst passage. Although I have paraphrased the orig-
inal, the syntax, examples and sentence structure are so similar to 
the original that the derivation is still obvious. Furthermore, there 
is no acknowledgement whatsoever of the original source. The only 
57 
Plagiarism, quotation, reference 
plausible justifcation for such paraphrase would be to avoid the 
charge that it is simply an unacknowledged quotation; there is no 
philosophical justifcation for simply rewriting a passage in slightly 
different words. 
3 Stephen Law says that if the sceptic is right, ‘then each of 
us is in an important way detached from the world around 
us’. Then we have no reason to believe that we inhabit a world 
of ‘trees, houses, cats, dogs, mountains and cars’. And we have 
no reason to believe in the existence of other people. For all 
you know, ‘your entire world – including all the people in it’ is 
merely virtual. 
Comment: This time, although the writer acknowledges the source 
of the quotation, this passage is simply a collage of quotations – 
some marked by quotation marks, others not. Although this might 
escape the charge of plagiarism, it is still a very weak way of sum-
marising a passage and demonstrates no understanding of the 
passage summarised. The main ideas are simply parroted. Most 
essays will involve a certain amount of summary and exposition 
of others’ ideas. The art of summary, however, is not an art of cut 
and paste. It involves explanation and, preferably, the use of some 
fresh examples rather than the reuse of just those in the original 
text. 
4 In The Philosophy Files, Stephen Law summarises the sceptical 
position: ‘each of us is in an important way detached from the 
world around us. You know nothing about the world out there’ 
(p. 53). Most importantly, he emphasises that a sceptic has no 
reason for believing in the existence of other people. Our expe-
riences, which seem to be of other people, may be misleading. 
We may in fact be looking at holograms, or else be plugged into 
a virtual reality machine which creates the illusion of our seeing, 
hearing, touching, feeling and smelling other people. 
58 
Avoid plagiarism 
Comment: This passage both summarises and explains the ideas in 
Law’s paragraph. It also acknowledges the source of the quotation, 
and puts the idea that we may be plugged into a virtual reality 
machine in the essay writer’s own words. This is a case not of plagia-
rism, but of the sort of exposition that would be appropriate in a 
philosophy essay. 
5 Most of us, most of the time are convinced that the world we 
perceive with our senses exists and is more or less as it appears 
to us. Sceptics challenge our complacency about this. They argue 
that we have no more reason to believe that such things as walls, 
tables, chairs, feet and goldfish actually exist than that they 
don’t. All these things may be imaginary. Furthermore, other 
people may not exist. Sceptics entertain the idea that what we 
take to be experience may be created by someone manipulating 
us: we may simply be plugged into a highly sophisticated virtual 
reality machine, even if we don’t realise this is the case. The key 
point is that for the sceptic there is no more reason to believe 
that things are as they seem than that they aren’t. 
Comment: This passsage addresses the same ideas as the quotation 
from Stephen Law, but it does so in a way that makes clear that I 
have understood the ideas being expressed and have made them my 
own to such a degree that there is probably no need to indicate in 
the main text that they were inspired by the passage in Law’s book 
(though it would be appropriate in such circumstances to include a 
reference to Law’s book in the bibliography). If in doubt, though, it 
is always safer to include mention of the original source, and you 
are unlikely ever to be penalised for this.* 
* For this reason, I should mention that the idea for laying out examples of plagiarism 
in this way came from a handout written in 1989 by Richard Dennis of the University 
College London Geography department, though I have used my own examples and 
have included more explanation of them than he does. 
59 
Plagiarism, quotation, reference 
Use quotation marks 
Whenever you quote someone else you need to communicate this 
fact to your reader. The simplest way is to put the other person’s 
words within single inverted commas. So you might write: 
Nigel Warburton, in his book The Basics of Essay Writing (2006), 
wrote that ‘essay writing is at the heart of education’. 
If you omit quotation marks in cases like this, you may be branded 
a plagiarist. Here I have used an indentation to indicate that the 
whole sentence above is a quotation. This technique is usual for 
longer quotations. If, however, you fnd yourself using longer quota-
tions, you should ask yourself whether they are really necessary. If 
your essay is broken up by numerous longer quotations, you are 
probably using cut and paste as an alternative to critical thought. 
An academic essay should be a critical argument to a conclusion, 
not a collage of quotations. To justify the inclusion of any longer 
quotation you must be sure to analyse that quotation rather than to 
treat its presence as self-explanatory. 
Give clear references 
and a bibliography 
References are the notes indicating the precise source (page number, 
etc.) of quoted lines, or paraphrased ideas. A bibliography is a list, 
in alphabetical order (by author surname), of all the works consulted 
or referred to when writing your essay, including books, articles 
and web pages. Bibliographies usually appear at the very end of an 
essay. Consistency of style in writing references or a bibliography 
60 
Give clear references and a bibliography 
is very important: without this consistency, confusions can arise. 
Most tutors give guidance on the reference system you are to use. 
If your tutor leaves the choice to you, read this section and select 
the system for giving references that seems most straightforward. 
The main reasons for giving references and a bibliography are 
1) so that other people can locate the sources of your ideas if they 
want to; and 2) to avoid the charge of plagiarism. 
There are several different acceptable conventions on giving 
references. The main information you need to communicate in your 
bibliography is the author’s name, the title of the book, and usually 
the place, publisher and the date of its publication. If the entry is 
for an article, the journal title and volume/issue number, together 
with the page references for the article, are key. 
The two main ways of indicating sources are 1) including most 
of the information in a footnote or endnote (an endnote is a note at 
the end of the essay); and 2) including basic information in brackets 
in the main text of your essay, and full bibliographical informa-
tion in the bibliography at the end of your essay. This second style 
of referencing is sometimes known as the ‘author/date’ system. If 
you are using this system and either referring to or quoting from a 
specifc page or pages, then you should include the page number as 
well as the author and date. It is easier to see the difference between 
these two styles by looking at examples: 
In his novel The Spire (1), William Golding portrays a man driven 
by sexual passion who interprets this as divine calling. 
1. Golding, William, The Spire, London: Faber, 1954 
In his novel The Spire (Golding, 1954) William Golding portrays 
a man driven by sexual passion who interprets this as divine 
calling. 
61 
Plagiarism, quotation, reference 
Bibliography 
Golding, William (1954) The Spire, London: Faber. 
A very widely used convention that you should be aware of is 
to underline or italicise book titles and to put article or chapter titles 
within inverted commas. So, Philosophy: The Basics or Philosophy: 
The Basics would clearly be a book; whereas ‘Freedom to Box’, 
because it is within inverted commas, is either an article or a chapter 
heading. Once you have realised this, you will glean more infor-
mation from scanning through a bibliography than you would 
have done previously. It is surprising how few students are aware 
of this convention. Another convention is to put URLs of Internet 
sites within this sort of bracket: <>, and to give the date when 
you consulted the site (since sites may be updated). If you don’t put 
the Internet site within brackets of some kind, your reader may be 
confused about whether a full stop or other item of punctuation is 
part of the address or not. 
Key points 
• Don’t plagiarise. 
• Always acknowledge your sources by using quotation marks and, 
if appropriate, a bibliography. 
• Keep references consistent. 
62 
8 
The craft of writing 

Have something to say and say it as clearly as you can. That is 
the only secret of style. 
(Matthew Arnold) 
Get the tone right 
One of the surest ways of irritating your reader is to use colloquial 
language or a conversational style in an academic essay. The tone 
or register of what you write can be as important as its content. The 
academic essay is the wrong place to experiment with writing styles; 
save the experimentation for a creative writing class or your private 
notebooks, letters, emails or text messages. It is diffcult to lay down 
guidelines about what is acceptable in this respect, but it is important 
to develop an ear for the appropriate language to use. 
Here is an extreme case. If a student writes an essay using the 
spelling conventions of a text message – ‘2day’ for ‘today’ or ‘evng’ 
for ‘evening’, for example – this creates a bad impression no matter 
how brilliant the essay’s content. It shows insensitivity to the acad-
emic context. While text message abbreviations are effective in text 
messages, and some journalistic writing and advertising copywriting 
too, they are completely inappropriate in a student essay (unless, 
perhaps that essay is about different spelling conventions, in which 
case they would appear within inverted commas as examples of 
rather than uses of the words). Here are some more examples of 
inappropriate colloquialisms: 
• ‘Loads of writers admire Shakespeare’s imagery’ [use ‘many’] 
• ‘In The Merchant of Venice , Antonio and his mates tease Shylock’ 
[use ‘his friends’] 
65 
The craft of writing 
• ‘My favourite poem is Shelley’s ‘Ozymandias’ – it is wicked’ [use ‘a 
remarkable poem’ or equivalent] 
• ‘Othello loses his rag when he thinks Desdemona has betrayed him’ 
[use ‘loses his temper’] 
Five symptoms of an inappropriate tone 
• Use of exclamation marks (unless within quotations). Worse still are 
double exclamation marks, e.g. ‘King Duncan doesn’t realise that the 
Macbeths are planning to murder him!!’ 
• Use of slang (again, unless within quotations), e.g. ‘Banquo is a 
diamond geezer.’ 
• Chattiness: e.g. ‘Well that’s enough of my random thoughts, let’s 
have a look at what the author says on the topic.’ 
• One-sentence paragraphs. These are only really acceptable in tabloid 
journalism. On rare occasions they may be acceptable, but con-
secutive single-sentence paragraphs are almost always a mark of 
inappropriate tone. 
• Jokey comments: e.g. ‘Shakespeare’s Macbeth (now there’s a hen-
pecked guy!) hallucinates a dagger . . . What was he on?’ 
One way of developing sensitivity to academic writing and 
markers’ expectations is to look at other students’ essays, preferably 
alongside the feedback received from markers. This is a good way 
of understanding the range of styles of writing that a question can 
elicit. Another strategy is to try reading your own work aloud; this 
is an excellent technique for achieving a distance from your own 
writing, a distance that can allow you to develop a critical stance 
towards some aspects of it. 
66 
Punctuate effectively 
Be economical with adjectives 
Adjectives are words that colour prose: they describe nouns. ‘The 
quick sly fox with reddish hair dashes through the glistening wet 
undergrowth’ contains fve adjectives (all italicised). The best writers 
use adjectives with care. Try to avoid using more than one adjective 
to describe a single item: so write ‘Hardy’s bleak prose’ rather than 
‘Hardy’s bleak, sombre and dark prose’. If you use strings of adjec-
tives, your essays will read like the worst kind of creative writing. 
Punctuate effectively 
Apostrophes 
Apostrophes are very small, and misusing them is a minor mistake. 
Nevertheless, you should be aware that some examiners get very 
irritated by students who don’t know how to use them. Their irrita-
tion is often out of all proportion to the seriousness of the mistake: 
when students misuse apostrophes there is rarely any ambiguity 
about what they mean. Despite this, though, many people can’t 
help getting twitchy when they notice missing or, worse still, 
inappropriate apostrophes. You may think ‘Well, that’s their prob-
lem’, but irritating your examiner could affect your overall grade. 
You may not lose marks directly for that missing bit of punctuation, 
but you may have suggested to the examiner that you are not quite 
a first-rate student. This is not a good policy. If you ever make 
mistakes with apostrophes it is worth taking twenty minutes to break 
this habit. 
There are two uses of the apostrophe: to indicate a letter or letters 
that have been left out; and to indicate possession. 
67 
The craft of writing 
Missing letters 
• ‘It’s’ is short for ‘it is’, as in ‘It’s easy to improve.’ (Don’t confuse this 
with ‘its’, which means ‘belonging to it’ as in ‘the dog bit its own tail’.) 
• ‘Don’t’ is short for ‘do not’. 
• ‘Can’t’ is short for ‘cannot’. 
• ‘Who’s’ is short for ‘who is’, as in ‘Who’s afraid of Virginia Woolf?’ 
(Don’t confuse this with ‘whose’, which is the possessive of ‘who’, as 
in ‘the man whose car is parked outside’.) 
Possession 
The simplest cases are when the word doesn’t end in an ‘s’, e.g. ‘The 
dog’s dinner’, ‘the cat’s whiskers’. When you are talking about more 
than one dog or cat, these should be ‘the dogs’ dinner’ and ‘the cats’ 
whiskers’. 
Note that when a plural doesn’t end in ‘s’, such as ‘children’, you 
simply add the apostrophe and then an ‘s’: so you would write ‘the 
children’s playground’. 
When you have a name that ends in ‘s’, there are two different 
conventions. You should choose one or the other and be consistent: 
1 Convention 1: just add the apostrophe as in ‘Paris’ suburbs’ or 
‘Caruthers’ book’. 
2 Convention 2: add the apostrophe followed by a further ‘s’, as 
in ‘Paris’s suburbs’ or ‘Caruthers’s book’. 
The commonest mistakes that students make are leaving the 
apostrophe out altogether, writing phrases such as ‘Hardys novel’ 
rather than ‘Hardy’s novel’. More irritating still is putting in extra 
apostrophes: some students add them when they use a plural, e.g. 
‘Second World War pilot’s won the Battle of Britain’. Here there is 
neither a missing letter nor any possession, so the apostrophe 
shouldn’t be used. 
68 
Punctuate effectively 
If you are unsure about apostrophes, get a friend to copy out a 
short passage from something you are reading, leaving out all the 
apostrophes. Try putting them in yourself and see how you get on. 
Commas 
A common mistake is to leave out the second of two parenthetical 
commas. ‘Parenthesis’ is another word for bracketing off something. 
With this use of commas, omitting the second comma is like failing 
to put in a second bracket. So, for example, in the sentence I’m 
writing, the words ‘for example’ are bracketed off between two 
commas. Had I only included the frst example thus: ‘So, for example 
in the sentence I’m writing . . .’ then the function of the frst comma 
would be confusing. Look for missing second commas of this kind 
when you are revising your work. 
Colons and semicolons 
What colons are good for: fulflling the promise expressed in the frst 
part of a sentence (as in this sentence). Semicolons are useful when 
you want to break up a list that includes several quite long items; 
they are also effective when you want to balance two parts of a 
sentence (as in the one you are reading now). However, if you don’t 
feel confdent using long sentences split by semicolons, it is much 
safer to use a full stop, breaking a longer sentence in two. In the case 
of my own sentence above I could quite easily have written: 
‘Semicolons are useful when you want to break up a list that includes 
several quite long items. They are also effective when you want 
to balance two parts of a sentence.’ I suspect that the two-sentence 
version is slightly easier to follow. If you agree, then think hard 
before you write a long sentence. It might be better to split it 
into two or more shorter sentences, either as you write, or at the 
editing stage. 
69 
The craft of writing 
Exclamation marks 
Don’t use exclamation marks unless you are quoting something 
that includes them. You can probably get away with one exclama-
tion mark or perhaps two in an essay, but why take the risk? 
Exclamation marks are like heavy nudges in the ribs: not really 
appropriate for the tone of an academic essay. Resist the temptation 
to use this form of punctuation. It is unlikely that any academic 
essay has ever been improved by using exclamation marks. 
Use the active voice 
One of the easiest ways to make your writing more direct is to 
eliminate passive constructions. Use only active constructions. ‘The 
Romans defeated the Britons’ is an active use of the verb ‘defeated’. 
‘The Britons were defeated by the Romans’ is a passive use. Notice 
that the first sentence has only five words, whereas the second 
has seven. But apart from the passive being a more wordy way 
of expressing the same idea, it is more diffcult to unravel when 
reading. Clear, straightforward sentences are expressed in the active. 
Good writers rarely use the passive voice. 
Offcials in government often use passive constructions, perhaps 
at times to make what they are saying slightly opaque. As Harold 
Evans, the newspaper editor, commented, Churchill’s direct declara-
tion ‘Give us the tools and we will fnish the job’ easily trumps its 
translation into the style of an offcial communication: ‘The task 
would be capable of determination were the appropriate tools to be 
made available to those concerned’ (Harold Evans, Essential English, 
p. 24). 
Here are some examples of passive constructions that use an 
impersonal ‘it’. Avoid them: 
70 
Avoid convoluted sentences 
• It is often argued that 
• It is the case that/It is not the case that 
• It is believed that 
• It cannot be denied that 
• It will be recognised that 
• It should be pointed out that 
• It was felt necessary 
• It should be noted that 
Impersonal passives conceal who is arguing, believing, denying 
and so on; they also add unnecessary words to your essay. When 
you read through a draft, look out for these phrases and wherever 
possible rewrite sentences that contain them. 
A note about conventions in science 
The standard convention for writing scientifc reports and papers 
is to write them in the passive voice. So, for example, your teacher 
may expect you to write up a chemistry experiment impersonally: 
rather than ‘I heated the liquid in the test tube until it boiled’, your 
description might read ‘the liquid in the test tube was heated until 
it boiled’. Teachers may also ask you to write up experiments or 
surveys in the social sciences using this convention. Be sure that you 
know whether this is the convention that your teacher or lecturer 
wants you to use. If it isn’t, then eliminate passive constructions 
altogether. 
Avoid convoluted sentences 
The easiest way to avoid convoluted sentences is to write short to 
medium-length ones. Avoid long sentences altogether in exams. If 
71 
The craft of writing 
you fnd a sentence winding on from one line to the next and to the 
next, then it is probably too long. There is a straightforward solution. 
Find a place to break the sentence, then rewrite it as two shorter 
sentences (see below for an example). A succession of very short, 
abrupt sentences can be almost as diffcult to read as a long one. The 
most stylish essay writers as a matter of second nature avoid writing 
long and syntactically complex sentences. Nevertheless, some 
academics do welcome longer sentences, but only well-structured 
ones, as the following quotation from Thomas Dixon’s book How to 
Get a First makes clear. Notice that he actually illustrates his points 
by using longer and shorter sentences as he is writing about them: 
Academics disagree amongst themselves about sentences. Some 
favour short ones. Others are quite happy, indeed enthusiastic, 
about the idea that students should, in the course of their studies, 
cultivate the art of the long sentence; being able to retain control 
of one’s ideas and language while constructing a complex and 
involved sentence, making judicious use of commas and semi -
colons, they say, is an important academic skill. I prefer brevity. 
There is no need to adopt a hard and fast rule about this though. 
Sometimes a long and involved sentence might be appropriate 
and attractive. In my experience of reading and marking student 
essays, however, their sentences seem to be too long more often 
than they are too short. 
(Dixon, 2004, pp. 148–9) 
If you must write longer sentences, make sure they aren’t 
convoluted. Don’t make the reader work too hard to extract meaning 
from what you have written. The safest policy is always to write 
short to medium-length sentences. This is an aspect of the best 
general advice for writers: ‘be concise’. 
72 
Avoid adverbs 
Be concise 
In their classic short book on writing, The Elements of Style (2000), 
Strunk and White’s most important piece of advice is contained in 
three words that make up a section heading, ‘Omit needless words’. 
This is explained in slightly more detail: 
Vigorous writing is concise. A sentence should contain no 
unnecessary words, a paragraph no unnecessary sentences, for 
the same reason that a drawing should have no unnecessary lines 
and a machine no unnecessary parts. This requires not that the 
writer make all sentences short, or avoid all detail and treat 
subjects only in outline, but that every word tell. 
(Strunk and White, 2000, p. 23) 
This is excellent advice. Follow it. Notice too that by following their 
own advice Strunk and White could probably have reduced this 
instruction to two words: be concise. 
Avoid adverbs 
Adverbs are words which describe the verb in a sentence. So, for 
example, I have underlined the adjectives in the short passage below. 
They usually end in ‘ly’. 
The fsh swim quickly upstream, afraid that the dark waters might 
totally engulf them. Swiftly they flash past the river bank, 
steadfastly driving onwards to their breeding grounds. 
Adverbs have their uses, but their frequent use almost always 
detracts from the directness of writing. Even if you are a creative 
writer, pay careful attention to their use. If you are editing your 
73 
The craft of writing 
work, try going on an adverb hunt. For each adverb tracked down 
in your writing, decide whether anything has been lost by remov-
ing it. If something is lost, is there a better way of expressing the 
same idea? 
Avoid clichés 
A cliché is an overused phrase. The word ‘cliché’ is pejorative: calling 
something a cliché suggests that it is a bad use of English. So the 
judgement that a phrase is a cliché is already a judgement that it is 
something to avoid. Here are some examples: 
at the end of the day 
barking up the wrong tree 
a can of worms 
the dim and distant past 
can’t see the wood for the trees 
dire straits 
far and away 
glutton for punishment 
great minds think alike 
in this day and age 
in the nick of time 
new lease of life 
silent majority 
the fact of the matter is . . . 
throw the baby out with the bathwater 
tower of strength 
well and truly 
with the best will in the world 
74 
Avoid these common mistakes 
You should avoid clichés wherever possible as they make your 
writing dull: think how little would have been added to this last 
sentence if I’d written ‘as dull as ditchwater’ in place of ‘dull’. Your 
ideas won’t seem fresh if they are presented using these familiar 
expressions. Clichés also contribute to a journalistic or colloquial 
tone that is inappropriate for academic writing. Most of us use 
clichés in speech and in writing without recognising it, or at least 
without worrying about it. Becoming aware of clichés in your 
writing can be an important step towards clearer and more precise 
self-expression. 
Learn from others’ clarity 
If you come across a piece of writing that seems particularly clear, 
try to work out how the writer has achieved this effect. Perhaps even 
copy out the passage, adding your own notes below it. If you get 
the opportunity to read other students’ essays on a topic on which 
you have written, take it. Ask yourself whether the writer is easy 
or diffcult to follow. Most students have very little idea about how 
people reading their work will experience it. 
Avoid these common 
mistakes 
alternate/alternative: When used as an adjective, ‘alternate’ means 
one then the other, as in the instruction to use alternate legs for an 
aerobics exercise; an ‘alternative’ is a choice. 
75 
The craft of writing 
complement/compliment: These are two different words. If some-
thing complements something else, it makes it complete. This is an 
easy way of remembering which (complement/compliment) is which; 
look at the spelling of ‘complement’ and ‘complete’. A compliment, 
in contrast, is praise. 
criterion/criteria: ‘Criterion’ is the singular, ‘criteria’ the plural. So 
don’t write ‘a criteria’. 
disinterested/uninterested : A common mistake is to think that 
‘disinterested’ means ‘bored by’. It doesn’t. Disinterested research is 
unbiased research. Don’t write ‘He was disinterested’ when you mean 
‘he was uninterested’ (i.e. bored by). 
e.g./i.e.: ‘E.g.’ means ‘for example, as in ‘there are many carnivorous 
animals, e.g. lions and tigers’. What follows ‘e.g.’ is simply a specifc 
instance of something more general. ‘I.e.’ means ‘that is’. Whatever 
follows ‘i.e.’ must be the equivalent of what has just been stated, 
as in ‘the writer who was known as George Orwell, i.e. Eric Blair’. 
Contrast this with ‘There are many well-known writers who have 
used pseudonyms, e.g. the writers known as Lewis Carroll, George 
Eliot and George Orwell.’ 
fewer/less: Use ‘fewer’ when you are writing about individual 
things; ‘less’ when you are referring to quantity that doesn’t divide 
up into units. This is easier to demonstrate than explain. ‘There are 
fewer people here today than yesterday’ is correct. ‘There are less 
people here’ is incorrect. ‘There is less water in the tank’ is correct. 
‘I have less money in my pocket’ is correct, as is ‘I have fewer coins 
in my pocket’, but ‘I have less coins’ is incorrect. 
its/it’s: ‘It’s’ is short for ‘it is’, as in ‘It’s Tuesday.’ ‘Its’ is the pos-
sessive of ‘it’, as in ‘The dog wagged its tail.’ If you have a tendency 
76 
Avoid these common mistakes 
to muddle these two, make sure you check through your work at the 
editing stage. 
literally: Sentences such as ‘he was literally over the moon’, unless 
used to describe astronauts, show that the writer doesn’t understand 
the meaning of the word ‘literally’ (in this case too, unless used 
ironically, the cliché ‘over the moon’ should be avoided). When you 
edit your work, the safest and most stylish option is to cut out 
all uses of ‘literally’. If you do want to use the word, make sure you 
avoid absurdity. 
phenomenon/phenomena: ‘Phenomenon’ is the singular, ‘phenom-
ena’ the plural. So don’t write ‘a phenomena’. 
principle/principal: a principle is a rule or guideline; ‘principal’ 
means ‘main’, or in the United States it is the head teacher in a 
school (hence the American mnemonic ‘your principal is your pal’). 
refute/repudiate: If you refute a statement, you demonstrate that it 
is false. If you repudiate it, you simply deny it. 
stationery/stationary: Stationery is paper, envelopes, etc. ‘Stationary’ 
means not moving. 
their/there/they’re: ‘Their’ is a possessive, as in ‘They put on their 
hats’; ‘there’ is a place, as in ‘over there’; ‘they’re’ is an abbreviation 
of ‘they are’. Most people know the difference between these three 
words, but even some university students confuse ‘there’ and ‘their’, 
so it is worth checking your work through before handing it in to 
make sure that you have used the correct form of these homonyms 
(words that sound the same). Getting them wrong is likely to colour 
the marker’s impression of you. 
77 
The craft of writing 
Avoid sexist language 
Some ways of phrasing your essay can appear sexist. For example, 
if you talk about ‘man’ or ‘mankind’ when you mean to include 
women as well, you run the risk of coming across as sexist even if 
that is not your general stance on the world. If, for example, you 
describe archaeology as ‘the study of man’s past through his arte-
facts’, you seem to be excluding women and their artefacts from the 
study. There are various ways in which you can avoid this charge 
of sexism. One is to use ‘humanity’ rather than ‘man’. Here are some 
terms which may come across as sexist, together with a more neutral 
alternative for each: 
actress – actor 
air hostess – fight attendant 
chairman – chair 
freman – f refghter 
foreman – supervisor 
layman – layperson 
mankind – humankind 
masterpiece – work of genius, iconic work 
policeman – police offcer 
salesman – salesperson (though, obviously, you shouldn’t alter the 
title of Arthur Miller’s play Death of a Salesman) 
weatherman – weather forecaster 
workman – worker 
Don’t use ‘he’ (or ‘she’) when you mean ‘he or she’. One option 
is to use ‘they’, as in ‘If a headteacher is involved they should fll in 
a record of the meeting’ rather than ‘If a headteacher is involved he 
should fill in a record of the meeting.’ The second of these two 
examples gives the impression that all headteachers are male. The 
first, however, is rather awkward. A far better solution in many 
78 
Spelling 
cases is to rephrase the sentence so that you are using a plural noun. 
In the case above, this would give us ‘If headteachers are involved 
they should fll in a record of the meeting.’ As you can see from this 
example, however, this may change nuances of meaning. You need 
to be sensitive to individual cases and find an alternative that 
captures the meaning you want to express. Even if you don’t happen 
to believe that the use of ‘he’ for ‘he or she’ is sexist, it probably isn’t 
worth risking using ‘he’ in this context as the person marking your 
essay may feel quite differently about this. 
Spelling 
In the age of electronic spell-checkers it is very easy to conceal poor 
spelling. However, most students aren’t allowed to use spell-checkers 
in exams. So, it is a good idea to put in a few hours to make sure 
that you don’t make basic spelling mistakes, not because you are 
likely to have marks deducted for poor spelling, but rather because 
poor spelling may colour an examiner’s view of you. 
The most important spellings to get right are the names of 
people, characters, places, books, poems, paintings, etc. that are the 
subject matter of your essay. Make sure that you know how to spell 
these. It is very simple to make a list of the key proper names that 
occur in your subject. Some names, such as ‘Nietzsche’, are very 
diffcult to spell: it is worth putting in some time learning these, as 
if you get them wrong you may give the examiner the impression 
that you don’t care very much about the subject. 
Apart from names, there are many words which students strug-
gle to spell. Below is a list of words that students often misspell. Skim 
over it to see whether you know all the spellings: if not, create your 
own list of diffcult words. Recognise that we all have diff culty 
79 
The craft of writing 
with some words, but you can eliminate some obvious mistakes, 
and in the process give a much better impression to the person 
reading your essay. 
Diffcult spellings 
abbreviation character 
absence chronological 
accident colleague 
accommodation committee 
achieve conceit 
acknowledge conceive 
acquire condemn 
address consensus 
adjacent courtesy 
advertisement deceive 
analogous despair 
annihilate despise 
antecedent dilemma 
apparatus ecstasy 
apparently effcient 
appreciate embarrass, embarrassment 
approach environment 
argument exercise 
artefact exorcise (or exorcize) 
basically existence 
beautiful extraordinary 
beginning fulfl 
believe glamour, glamorous 
buried government 
business gruesome 
caricature hoi polloi 
census humorist 
80 
Spelling 
humour, humorous 
idiosyncrasy 
idiosyncratic 
illiterate 
immigration 
in fagrante 
incendiary 
incentive 
incomprehensible 
indigenous 
independent 
indispensable 
inoculate 
instil 
irresponsible 
itinerary 
jeopardy 
judgement 
knowledgeable 
literary 
literature 
medieval 
millennium 
necessary 
non sequitur 
noticeable 
obscene 
obsolete 
occasion 
occur 
occurred 
omit 
parliament 
playwright 
possession 
prerogative 
properly 
psychiatric 
psychiatrist 
psychological 
questionnaire 
really 
receipt 
receive 
recommend 
repeat 
repetition 
restaurant 
rhyme 
rhythm 
schedule 
seize 
separate 
siege 
solemn 
stationary 
stupefy 
subtle, subtlety 
succeed 
success, successful 
summary 
supersede 
surreptitious 
symbol 
temperature 
threshold 
81 
The craft of writing 
transfer, transferable, transferred, Wednesday 
transferring withhold 
vicious written 
viscous xenophobia 
Key points 
• The tone of your writing should be appropriate for an academic 
essay. 
• Small mistakes, such as misplaced apostrophes, can have a dispro-
portionate effect on a marker’s impression of your work. 
• Avoid passive constructions, adverbs and overuse of adjectives. 
• Be concise. 
82 
9 
The exam essay 

Understand the genre 
The examination essay is a genre in itself. Most examinations 
require you to write several essays in quite a short period of time. 
This severely limits what you can say, particularly if you are not 
allowed to bring notes or books into the examination room. There 
is almost no scope for rewriting: any corrections after the frst draft 
are likely to be minimal. You may fnd that you scarcely have time 
to reread what you have written before handing it in. Consequently, 
if you want to succeed in this genre you will need to adjust your 
writing style accordingly. You will also need to be aware of what 
is possible within the time constraints: if you expect to achieve too 
much in the allotted time, you may set off at the wrong pace and 
never arrive at your conclusion. 
The basic principles of essay writing I have outlined in the rest 
of this book apply to examination essays too, but the emphasis is 
somewhat different. The three most important principles of good 
examination essay technique are: 
1 Answer the question set. 
2 Make a case. 
3 Omit unnecessary words. 
Examination essays need to be focused and direct. There is no 
time to waste words, follow digressions or quote extensively. Nor 
will you have time to write a long plan. A typical examination essay 
in the humanities subjects will make three or four main points, 
perhaps one per paragraph of the essay, and these points will build 
to the conclusion expressed in the fnal paragraph (and perhaps also 
mentioned in the introduction). Realising how little you will be able 
to write within an examination should focus your preparation. 
85 
The exam essay 
Be prepared 
The best preparation for writing under examination essays is writing 
practice plans and practice essays under examination conditions. If 
you want to improve your examination performance, you will have 
to face up to this. Forty-fve minutes spent planning and writing a 
practice essay will be far more effective for most students than 
several hours of rereading notes. As with all writing, you may fnd 
that you rationalise why you needn’t write a practice essay. Perhaps 
you intend to do one tomorrow, not today. You might fnd all kinds 
of other distractions and avoidance strategies. But if you really want 
to perform better in examinations you do need to practise the 
activity that you will be judged on, or something very close to it. 
Most students only devote a tiny fraction of their revision time to 
practising essay plans and essay writing, but ultimately their fnal 
grades will depend on whether they can write essays under these 
challenging conditions. 
Set yourself timed essays on topics you understand thoroughly. 
Don’t be tempted to write a practice essay on a vague topic: set a 
specifc question for yourself, either one that has come up in a past 
examination, or one that you think might well come up in the future. 
The exercise of inventing possible examination questions is itself 
very instructive: there are usually very few plausible questions that 
can be asked about any particular topic. You may even fnd that you 
second-guess the examiner and prepare a practice question that is 
very close to the one you end up writing in the examination. That 
isn’t the main point of the exercise, however. The main reason for 
writing practice plans and essays is to get into the habit of writing 
to the appropriate length at the right pace, answering the question 
set, and of making a case for a conclusion rather than listing a series 
of unconnected facts. 
Once you have a suitable question, write it out. Plan your 
answer; then write the essay itself. Next, the really painful bit: 
86 
Use active revision techniques 
read the essay back, preferably aloud. You should be able to hear how 
the essay is going, whether you have managed to achieve an appro-
priate style, whether your reasoning is plausible or not, and so on. 
You will very soon realise how much easier it is to read prose written 
in short or medium-length sentences rather than in long ones. As 
you read, ask yourself these three fundamental questions: 
1 Have I really answered the question set? 
2 Have I made a good case for the conclusion I’ve given? 
3 Have I omitted unnecessary words? 
If you have a friend taking the same course, you might ask that 
friend to listen as you reread the essay and to consider those three 
questions too. 
Use activ e revision techniques 
In general, active revision techniques are the best. Find ways of 
engaging critically with the material you need to learn; don’t just 
read and reread your notes or set books. For instance, if you have 
half an hour to spend on revision, you might set yourself three exam 
questions and write ten-minute plans for each. In your essay plan, 
try to map out a defence of a conclusion using evidence and argu-
ment, following the principles stressed in this book. This should 
then take you back to your notes and books as you realise where the 
gaps in your knowledge are. Test yourself on what you know, or test 
a friend. Rewrite your notes into a shorter, more memorable form. 
Whatever revision techniques you use, try to make sure that you 
have a clear goal: don’t waste time in unfocused reading. Passive 
revision takes less energy, but it won’t get you where you want to 
be unless you are very lucky. 
87 
The exam essay 
Coping with exam nerves 
Most people fnd exams stressful. Who hasn’t felt their heart race, 
their palms sweat, and even a sinking feeling in the pit of their 
stomach when standing outside an exam room waiting to go in? This 
stress, if channelled, can be a source of energy and focus. It is a sign 
that you are taking the exam seriously. Some people, however, fnd 
exams so stressful that they never realise their potential under exam 
conditions. They get into a cycle of increasing stress that blocks 
their ability to think clearly and in extreme cases prevents them 
from writing at all. 
One of the best ways to minimise the effect of exam nerves and 
to stop them spiralling out of control is to be well prepared. That way 
you can be confdent that you will be able to answer the questions 
set. If you have done some timed essay writing outside the exam 
room, you will be aware of how little you can write under these 
conditions and how important it is to focus your answer. In this 
way you reduce the risk of having the nasty surprise of fnding that 
time has run out halfway through your fnal essay. At the very least 
you will have got used to writing by hand at speed. Good revision, 
then, should eliminate some of the causes of exam nerves. It won’t 
eliminate all nerves, though, and that is probably as well. The fow 
of adrenaline can improve your performance as long as you don’t 
let your anxiety get out of control. 
In the days and then hours coming up to an exam it is extremely 
important to keep the whole matter in perspective. Getting adequate 
sleep is one way of helping to achieve this. Some people have 
managed to get excellent results on very few hours’ sleep, but this 
isn’t easy. It isn’t just the night before the exam that matters; try to 
avoid building up a sleep defcit in the week or so before you take 
the exam. Avoid drinking coffee or tea in the evening and don’t 
stay up until the early hours revising. This is likely to be counter-
productive and get you into bad sleep patterns that are hard to break. 
88 
Coping with exam nerves 
Remember that the quality of your revision is only one key to 
success; another is being alert in the exam itself. You need to realise 
that no matter how well your revision has gone, you will need to 
think during the exam, not simply regurgitate facts. 
If your revision hasn’t gone well, or your sleep has been dis-
rupted, you may feel the temptation to catastrophise: to see the 
worst possible outcome as if it had already happened. In this case 
you might think that you won’t be able to pass the exam. You can 
convince yourself that you have failed even before you’ve seen the 
question paper. But these negative thoughts can actually make it 
more likely that you won’t succeed; far better to be positive, and 
to remember that even if your revision hasn’t gone perfectly, you 
will have a reasonable chance of passing the exam if you have good 
exam technique and can organise what you do know well within 
your essays. 
Rather than sit worrying about what terrible things might 
happen in the exam room, set some time aside to build up a positive 
and imaginative pre-visualisation of giving a superb performance 
in the exam. This is time well spent. See yourself relaxed yet alert 
going into the exam room to fnd your name on your desk. You 
turn over the exam paper and read through all the questions 
carefully. You mark the ones you want to attempt, and feel confdent 
that you can give good, well-structured responses to each one. You 
have written down the fnishing time for each essay. You plan and 
then write each essay in a calm and fuent way, and everything you 
have studied on the subject comes back to you effortlessly. Each of 
your essays makes a well-argued case for a conclusion that relates 
directly to the question asked. Whenever you make a general point 
you back it up with evidence or quotation. You fnish fve minutes 
before the allotted time and use the extra minutes to go over your 
paper, eliminating minor mistakes of punctuation, spelling, etc. As 
you walk from the exam room you feel confdent that you have 
given the best performance that you could have done. 
89 
The exam essay 
In the actual exam, if you find yourself panicking, the best 
remedy is to stop writing for a few moments and try to control your 
breathing. Under stress we tend to take fast, shallow breaths that can 
eventually produce dizziness. If you begin to panic, take a deep 
breath through your nose, flling your lungs. Let the breath out, and 
repeat the exercise several times. It won’t take long, but it could 
relax you enough to stop the panic. 
Read the questions 
One very common mistake is to answer the frst question you see 
that you know you can answer. Students often emerge blinking 
from the examination hall only to realise that there was a question 
on the paper they could have answered much more easily than the 
one they attempted. This is a horrible feeling. Don’t let it happen 
to you. Skim through all the questions on the paper before deciding 
which ones you are going to focus on. 
Handwriting 
If you have to write your answers to an examination by hand, as 
most students still do, then your handwriting must be legible. This 
isn’t a question of aesthetics; it needn’t be beautiful or stylish. What 
matters is that someone else can read it without having to interpret 
what you probably wrote. Many of us rarely write at length by hand 
now, as word processing is increasingly common. So, if you know 
that your handwriting can be diffcult to read, you should devote 
90 
Key points 
some time to making it more legible, perhaps by writing practice 
essays under strict time constraints. 
Key points 
• Exams are your chance to apply the basic principles of essay 
writing. 
• The best way to avoid exam nerves is to prepare well. 
• Use active rather than passive revision techniques. 
• If you fnd yourself panicking in an exam, stop and take several 
deep breaths. 
• Visualise a successful exam. 
• Don’t underestimate the part played by legible handwriting. 
91 

10 
Improving your writing 

Rewriting and editing 
. . . often I completely change my mind in the course of writing 
an essay. 
(Susan Sontag, in Plimpton ed., 1999, p. 324) 
In exams you won’t have the luxury of rewriting what you have 
written. But with essays written in less pressured circumstances the 
best way to improve the fnished result is to edit and, if necessary, 
rewrite it. In the age of word processing, editing has become a much 
more straightforward process than it was thirty years ago. Here is a 
checklist of questions that you might want to consult before handing 
in any essay: 
Checklist 
• Have I answered the question set? 
• Have I made a case for a clearly stated conclusion? 
• Have I used evidence, quotation and argument to make my case? 
• Have I considered and answered possible counterarguments? 
• Is the structure of my essay clearly signposted throughout? 
• Have I acknowledged the sources of any quotations I’ve used? 
• Have I provided a bibliography in the appropriate form? 
• Is the tone of my essay appropriate for an academic context? 
• Have I resorted to clichés or colloquialisms? 
• Have I used long sentences that would be better split? 
• Are there any adjectives or adverbs that I could remove? 
• Is every paragraph relevant to the main argument of the essay? 
• Have I made any slips in my use of apostrophes, commas or quotation 
marks? 
95 
Improving your essay writing 
• Have I spelt names of authors, places, books, etc. correctly? 
• Is my writing legible? 
Learn from feedback 
Many students are more concerned with the mark they get than with 
the feedback tutors offer them. This is a foolish approach: the most 
valuable aspect of feedback is likely to be the specifc comments you 
get on your work. If you ignore them, you will be lucky to improve 
on the mark you get for your frst essay. Highlight or copy comments 
which seem particularly apt or useful. The most useful feedback is 
the kind that transfers to other essays. So, if a tutor points out that 
you haven’t considered counterarguments to your position, think 
about whether this is an approach that is unique to the particular 
essay you have written, or a pattern in your work. If the latter, then 
you have a very clear guideline about where you should be putting 
in most effort, both in writing and particularly in rewriting or editing 
your work. 
Learn from other students’ essays 
If you can persuade your friends to hand over their essays with 
their marks and comments, you will learn a great deal. Even if your 
friends’ essays are not particularly well written and miss most of the 
important points, you can still learn from them: you might get a 
sense of where your own strengths and weaknesses lie, your friends 
might include points that you failed to make, or they might be strong 
96 
Eliminate bad habits 
in an area in which you are comparatively weak. At the very least 
you get a sense of what it is like as a marker to read someone else’s 
essay, how difficult it can be to unravel bad handwriting, how 
irritating basic errors of grammar, spelling and punctuation can be. 
Eliminate bad habits 
As important as the cultivation of good habits is the elimination of 
bad ones. Remember that if you keep practising what you have 
always done in the past, you will probably only get good at doing 
what you have done in the past. To make progress you need to 
identify your good and bad habits, eliminate the bad ones and play 
to your strengths. 
In order to help you eliminate bad habits and reinforce good 
ones I’ve sketched several character-types of poor essay writers 
below. My examples are almost caricatures, and most weak essay 
writers don’t always fall neatly into one category or another, but the 
bad tendencies I’ve outlined are very common among students. If 
you recognise some of these bad tendencies in yourself, then that 
self-awareness should be the starting point for signifcant improve-
ment. If you don’t know what you are doing wrong, you will have 
diff culty moving forwards. 
97 
Improving your essay writing 
Do you recognise yourself here? 
The alluder 
The alluder is someone who makes allusions, oblique references to 
points rather than the points themselves. Alluders don’t feel the 
need to spell out what they mean, they know that the marker of 
their essay understands the topic very well, and will only require the 
mention of a point to recognise the brilliance of the alluder’s mind. 
Why bother explaining what a thinker thought when the marker 
knows all this already? Better surely simply to hint at ideas. Or so 
the alluder thinks. 
The alluder’s essay often degenerates into a kind of name-
dropping with hints at the arguments that it would be tedious for 
the writer to spell out in detail. Alluders are often surprised by the 
low marks that they receive for their essays as they know much of 
the relevant material and feel that they have done enough to demon-
strate this to the marker or examiner. 
Most likely to write: ‘Arthur Marwick elucidated the dominant ideas 
of the 1950s in his book about post-war Britain. He was mostly right 
in his analysis.’ 
Instead of: ‘Arthur Marwick proposed sex and class as the two 
main themes running through 1950s popular culture, as typifed by 
the novel and subsequent flm of John Braine’s Room at the Top. 
Although his selection of “typical” 1950s popular culture is to a 
degree subjective, it is certainly true that these themes recur and are 
foregrounded in many of the most successful and lasting novels and 
movies of that period.’ 
98 
Do you recognise yourself here? 
The fact regurgitator 
The fact regurgitator has a good memory for detail and simply 
replays facts, whether relevant or not, at the slightest stimulus. This 
type of essay writer puts down everything he or she knows that is 
vaguely related to the topic. The result is usually barely readable and 
never gets to grips with the question asked. 
Most likely to write (in response to a question about Rousseau’s 
concept of the social contract): ‘Jean-Jacques Rousseau, who ran 
away from Geneva in his early youth, and became one of the most 
controversial freelance writers of his age, despite admitting to being 
a fasher and a masochist in his posthumously published Confessions 
(not to mention having a public tiff with the great philosopher David 
Hume), was a moral philosopher of wide fame, though he was even 
more famous in his lifetime as a novelist.’ 
Instead of: ‘Jean-Jacques Rousseau’s notion of a social contract is 
based on his belief that in a so-called “state of nature”, i.e. outside 
of any civilised common society, traits of the noble savage could 
emerge. He opens his book The Social Contract with the declaration 
that man is “born free, yet is everywhere in chains” . . .’ 
The digressor 
Digressors, who may also be fact regurgitators, often begin their 
essays well with direct references to the question set, and so on. 
Some way into an example or illustration of a point, however, we 
fnd that they have temporary amnesia about why they are writing. 
The richness of the example takes over, and the digressors’ essays 
become unfocused. Any topic loosely related to the one under dis-
cussion may fnd its way in. The conclusion of a digressor’s essay 
typically feels tacked on the end, if it is there at all, as a non sequitur, 
something that does not follow logically from what has gone before. 
99 
Improving your essay writing 
Most likely to write (in response to ‘Is Othello simply duped by 
Iago in Shakespeare’s Othello?’): ‘Throughout the play, Iago schemes 
to dupe Othello into believing that Desdemona, his wife, has been 
unfaithful to him. This is most obvious in the incident in which Iago 
contrives to have Othello see Cassio with a handkerchief that Othello 
had given Desdemona. This is reminiscent of the well-attested 
psychological tendency we all have to see what we expect to see: 
the idea that our “mental set”, our expectations, actually affects 
what we do perceive. When someone writes “Paris in the the Spring” 
many of us will fail to read the second “the” because, expecting to 
see only one, we actually do see only one. This may be the basis of 
many optical illusions. It certainly is the source of so-called “trompe 
l’oeil” pictures – those that trick us that we are looking at a real 
thing (e.g. an envelope on a writing desk) rather than a painting of 
an envelope.’ 
Instead of : ‘Throughout the play, Iago schemes to dupe Othello 
into believing that Desdemona, his wife, has been unfaithful to him. 
This is most obvious in the incident in which Iago contrives to have 
Othello see Cassio with a handkerchief that Othello had given 
Desdemona (ref.). There are, nevertheless, several key points during 
the play when Othello could easily have sought corroboration for 
Iago’s insinuations. For example . . .’ 
The fence sitter 
The fence sitter may know the topic very well and give excellent 
summaries of the important and relevant points. But even if asked 
a direct question, the fence sitter is likely just to present what can 
be said on either side of the issue, and never reach a forceful 
conclusion. The usual conclusion of a fence sitter’s essay can be 
paraphrased as ‘There are arguments on both sides.’ What the fence 
sitter fails to realise is that part of what the question setter is trying 
100 
Do you recognise yourself here? 
to get the essay writer to do is weigh the competing arguments and 
come to a conclusion, not simply to list the arguments. On some 
occasions, of course, the arguments on either side of a question may 
be very well balanced. But this is not always the case. The fence sitter 
usually comes across as lacking the confdence to make a case for 
a conclusion. 
Most likely to write (in response to ‘Should fox hunting be 
banned?’): ‘The arguments on both sides of the fox hunting debate 
are strong and complex. Given the weight of evidence that hunted 
foxes suffer great psychological and physical stress and pain, it 
might seem that the balance is strongly tipped towards maintaining 
a ban on hunting. Yet there are powerful arguments on the other side 
too. For instance, foxes cause a great deal of damage and need to 
be culled, and fox hunting does keep fox numbers down effectively. 
So, there are arguments on both sides.’ 
Instead of: ‘As I have shown, the arguments for a ban on fox 
hunting far outweigh those on the other side. So, in answer to the 
question, yes, fox hunting should certainly be banned (and already 
is under United Kingdom law).’ 
Or, perhaps : ‘Despite the arguments about the barbarity of fox 
hunting and its alleged effects on the fox, there are very strong argu-
ments against an outright ban. The diffculty facing anyone wanting 
to preserve an absolute ban on fox hunting is that almost all the 
animal welfare arguments used to support it, if used in the context 
of farming in general, would require the government to ban all 
factory farming, and most transportation of mammals to slaughter-
houses. Consequently, fox hunting should not be banned unless 
factory farming is banned, though there are very good reasons for 
monitoring it and minimising the worst practices involved in it.’ 
101 
Improving your essay writing 
The summariser 
The summariser is someone who methodically converts books, 
articles, lecture notes, and so on into shorter, often well-expressed, 
summaries. The sources of ideas are usually immediately recog-
nisable, and there is no sense that the summariser has made the 
arguments and thoughts his or her own. Like the fence sitter, the 
summariser rarely comes to a conclusion, and if he or she does, it 
is usually someone else’s conclusion summarised. The marker of a 
summariser is usually struck by how little the essay writer has 
thought about the subject matter. Clear summary is an important 
aspect of academic writing, but it should not be at the expense 
of the student making a case, weighing the evidence and drawing a 
conclusion. 
Comment: The dangers of over-summarising only become apparent 
over the course of an essay when it emerges that the writer has 
failed to build a case or draw a conclusion, but has instead sum -
marised (or even presented summaries of other people’s summaries) 
throughout. 
The personaliser 
The personaliser’s essay is immediately recognisable because of 
the frequency with which phrases such as ‘I think’, ‘in my opinion’, 
‘in my experience’ and just ‘I’ occur. Sometimes these could simply 
be eliminated, since it is obvious that the essay is the opinion of the 
writer, and rather tedious to have this spelt out. This repetition 
of ‘I’ is inappropriate for most academic essays: each use is either 
unnecessary, or else suggests that the writer is incapable of decen-
tring from his or her own experience to make a more objective 
assement of the issue being discussed. Worse still, typically a per-
sonaliser will argue from a single case – his or her own – without 
acknowledging that this experience may not be representative of the 
102 
Do you recognise yourself here? 
wider population or group under consideration. The personaliser 
may also signifcantly overrate the marker’s interest in the essay 
writer’s psychology, autobiography and opinions. The result is a 
confessional tone that suggests that the writer is not fully aware of 
the conventions and expectations of this kind of academic writing. 
Most likely to write (in response to ‘What are the main causes of 
the high incidence of obesity among children in Britain today?’): ‘In 
my opinion, the main causes of obesity in Britain are that parents 
don’t take time to teach their children about healthy eating; I also 
believe very strongly that school dinners are full of fat. My own 
experience confrms these two facts. My parents never taught me 
that there was anything wrong with eating large quantities of crisps 
and chips, and my school meals (which, believe me, were disgusting, 
but we were made to eat them nevertheless) usually consisted of 
fatty meat cooked in fatty gravy, followed by a sickly dessert. 
Personally, I think these two factors are the most important.’ 
Instead of: ‘There are several important causes of childhood obesity 
in contemporary Britain. First, fast food with high fat content is 
readily available and heavily advertised to children. The huge 
growth in fast food outlets in inner cities since the 1970s coincides 
with signifcant increases in childhood obesity. Fast food outlets 
target children: for example, burger chains often advertise free toys 
as a way of enticing children to persuade their parents to buy this 
fast food. Second, many children are ignorant of the health risks 
of a diet high in fatty food. Third, many school meals are high in 
fat content. When children opt to bring sandwiches, their parents 
frequently include crisps and other fatty snacks in their lunchboxes.’ 
103 
Improving your essay writing 
The asserter 
The asserter doesn’t feel the need to justify anything he or she writes. 
An asserter’s essay is typically just a list of opinions and bold 
pronouncements. The asserter completely misses the point of essay 
writing, which is to demonstrate an understanding of the subject 
matter and an ability to think clearly about it. Those marking essays 
are quickly exasperated by reading a series of conclusions with no 
argument or evidence leading to those conclusions. 
Most likely to write (in response to ‘Critically discuss Freud’s theory 
of psychoanalysis.’): ‘Freud was misguided. His idea that we have 
an unconscious mind that affects our everyday life is simply wrong-
headed. His belief that the unconscious manifests itself through 
dreams and so-called “Freudian slips” is clearly absurd. Therefore, 
there is nothing to be said in favour of the Freudian theory of 
psychoanalysis.’ 
Instead of, for example: ‘Freud’s theory of psychoanalysis included 
the claim that unconscious forces have a signifcant impact on all 
our lives. One criticism of this claim is that it is impossible to dis-
prove it. If you deny that the Freudian unconscious exists, Freudians 
will claim that you are simply providing evidence that it does exist: 
it is your unconscious that is making you so aggressively resistant 
to believing in the unconscious.’ 
The jargonist 
The jargonist revels in being diffcult to understand. Give a jargonist 
a new term and he or she will happily use it several times in a sen-
tence. The more obscure the term, the better. The jargonist believes 
that technical language makes his or her essay sound more learned. 
In truth, excessive use of jargon is frequently a smokescreen to hide 
104 
Do you recognise yourself here? 
the depths of a writer’s ignorance. As the contemporary philosopher 
John Searle has wisely pointed out, ‘If you can’t say it clearly, you 
haven’t understood it yourself.’ 
Most likely to write (in response to ‘How plausible is the idea that 
the world bears evidence of God as its creator?’): ‘The teleological 
argument from a posteriori evidence, more than a priori, cosmo-
logical arguments, has prima facie plausibility, yet, ipso facto , 
should be viewed with suspicion. The fallacious analogical structure 
of reasoning, and dubious epistemological assumptions, albeit based 
on empirical observations, lend themselves to refutation.’ 
Instead of: ‘The design argument is based on the idea that, for 
example, the sophistication of the human eye can only adequately 
be explained by the existence of a Divine Designer (i.e. God) who 
conceived of and created this complex and highly effective organ. 
Darwin’s alternative explanation of how organisms adapt and 
evolve through a process of natural selection to some degree under-
mines this style of argument.’ 
The bullet pointer 
The bullet pointer’s essays frequently degenerate into lists of 
ungrammatical sentences. Although the content of the essay may 
be good, the bullet pointer doesn’t take the trouble to abide by the 
convention of writing coherent prose. At its worst, this bullet 
pointing can be superfcial in content as well as lazy as prose. 
Most likely to write (in response to ‘“In Thomas Hardy’s The Mayor 
of Casterbridge the hero is entirely responsible for his own downfall.” 
Discuss.’): 
• ‘The Mayor of Casterbridge sold his wife at an auction, so initiated 
events that came back to cause his downfall. 
105 
Improving your essay writing 
• But Hardy frequently alludes to Fate in the novel. 
• Yet there are several points in the novel where the Mayor allowed 
his rivalry with Farfrae to obscure his judgement. 
• Therefore the quotation in the question is correct.’ 
Instead of: ‘Hardy makes clear in the novel that the Mayor of 
Casterbridge’s early drunken decision to auction his own wife was 
the factor that triggered a series of events that eventually culminate 
in his downfall. Fate played its part, but the initial descent was 
begun by the Mayor’s own foolish act . . .’ 
The copy-and-paster 
The copy-and-paster doesn’t believe in wasting anything. Bits 
of other essays, unattributed quotations and indeed anything that 
more or less fts into the essay are likely to appear, hoisted into 
place using the copy and paste commands on a word processor. The 
mixture of styles, tenses, subject matter – and sometimes even fonts 
– quickly give the copy-and-paster away. Essays produced by such 
extreme and lazy methods of collage are seldom any good. There 
is a real danger of plagiarism, too, if copy-and-pasters are careless 
about attributing the sources of the words that they so freely cut and 
paste (see ‘The plagiarist’ below). 
Most likely to write : ‘The copy-and-paster doesn’t believe in 
wasting anything. Bits of other essays, unattributed quotations, 
and indeed anything that more or less fts into the essay are likely 
to appear, hoisted into place using the copy and paste commands 
on a word processor.’ 
106 
Do you recognise yourself here? 
The colloquialist 
The colloquialist has no idea about the appropriate tone for acad-
emic essay writing. He or she deliberately interjects jokey asides 
and colloquial language at every imaginable opportunity. The 
colloquialist’s essay is usually peppered with clichés. The result can 
be extremely irritating. 
Most likely to write (in response to ‘What were the main causes of 
the First World War?’): ‘At the end of the day, the First World War 
was the last century’s biggest fiasco. A real mudbath, with the 
generals making a dog’s dinner of the tactics and bottling some 
serious decisions. You may well ask what caused this pig’s ear of a 
war. There were several dodgy things going on at the time . . .’ 
Instead of: ‘There were three principal causes of the First World 
War: . . .’ 
The plagiarist 
The plagiarist takes from other writers and doesn’t bother to 
acknowledge his or her sources. Passing others’ work off as your 
own is a very serious offence in most academic contexts. The 
plagiarist often does this inadvertently, through sloppy notetaking 
rather than malice. But the authorities may not believe this, taking 
it as an excuse. Plagiarism comes in degrees. At its worst it is 
straightforward deception. 
Most likely to write (in response to ‘What is plagiarism?’): ‘The 
plagiarist takes from other writers and doesn’t bother to acknowl-
edge his or her sources. Passing others’ work off as your own is a 
very serious offence in most academic contexts. The plagiarist often 
does this inadvertently, through sloppy notetaking rather than 
malice.’ 
107 
Improving your essay writing 
Instead of : ‘In The Basics of Essay Writing , Nigel Warburton 
describes the plagiarist as someone who ‘takes from other writers 
and doesn’t bother to acknowledge his or her sources’ (Warburton, 
2005, p. 107).’ 
Key points 
• Improve your essay by editing and, if necessary, rewriting it. 
• Use the checklist provided on pages 95–6 to help you identify 
areas needing attention at the editing stage. 
• Take feedback seriously. 
• Identify and eliminate bad habits; reinforce good ones. 
108 
Conclusion 

Good luck 
The basics of essay writing aren’t complicated. They are quite 
straightforward to learn. If you form good habits in this area, you 
can make signifcant improvements very quickly. Every essay that 
you write should be another opportunity to develop your skills and 
to put the principles covered in this book into practice. 
Good luck with your writing. 
If you have found this book useful, or have any thoughts about 
how I might improve it in future editions, please email me at 
n.warburton@open.ac.uk. 
Website: http://www.nigelwarburton.com 
111 

Bibliography and 
further reading 

Bibliography 
Berra, Yogi (1998) The Yogi Book, New York: Workman Publishing. 
Brande, Dorothea (1983) Becoming a Writer, London: Macmillan. 
Dixon, Thomas (2004) How to Get a First, London: Routledge. 
Evans, Harold (2000) Essential English for Journalists, Editors and 
Writers, revised edition, London: Pimlico. 
Goldberg, Natalie (1998) Writing Down the Bones, Boston: Shambhala. 
Gowers, Ernest [3rd edition revised by Sidney Greenbaum and Janet 
Whitcut] (1987) The Complete Plain Words, London: Penguin. 
Law, Stephen (2003) The Philosophy Gym, London: Review. 
Plimpton, George, ed. (1999) Women Writers at Work , London: 
Harvill. 
Strunk, William Jr and White, E. B. (2000) The Elements of Style, 4th 
edition, Boston, MA: Allyn and Bacon. 
Warburton, Nigel (2004) Philosophy: The Essential Study Guide , 
London: Routledge. 
Further reading 
I’ve listed several books for further reading below. I wouldn’t recom-
mend spending too long reading about essay writing: as I stressed 
in my introduction, to improve in this area you need to practise. 
Writing well 
Strunk, William Jr and White, E. B. (2000) The Elements of Style, 4th 
edition, Boston, MA: Allyn and Bacon. 
115 
Bibliography and further reading 
Study skills 
Chambers, Ellie and Northedge, Andrew (1997) The Arts Good Study 
Guide, Milton Keynes: The Open University. 
Punctuation 
Truss, Lynne (2003) Eats, Shoots and Leaves, London: Profle. 
Making a case 
Weston, Anthony (2001) A Rulebook for Argument , 3rd edition, 
Indianapolis: Hackett. 
Critical thinking 
Warburton, Nigel (2000) Thinking from A to Z, 2nd edition, London: 
Routledge. 
Note-taking 
Buzan, Tony and Buzan, Barry (2003) The Mind Map Book, revised 
edition, London: BBC Worldwide. 
Internet resources 
There are numerous websites devoted to essay writing. Many of 
these are linked to colleges and universities. Not all the advice avail-
able online is useful, so you will need to read anything there with 
a critical eye. Also, be wary of the trap of spending hours surfng 
the Internet as a way of avoiding the activity of writing. 
116 
Bibliography and further reading 
The Open University short course A172 Start Writing Essays 
is taught online. Further details of this course can be found at 
www.open.ac.uk, call 01908 653231 or email general-enquiries@ 
open.ac.uk. 
117 